<header id=022788>
Published Date: 2021-06-12 13:51:18 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed neurological illness - Canada (03): (NB) updates
Archive Number: 20210612.8433060
</header>
<body id=022788>
UNDIAGNOSED NEUROLOGICAL ILLNESS - CANADA (03): (NEW BRUNSWICK) UPDATES
***********************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Mon 7 Jun 2021
Source: Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health (Public Health) [edited]
https://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/departments/ocmoh/cdc/neuro_cluster.html


The Province of New Brunswick is collaborating with local and national subject matter experts and healthcare providers to investigate a group of individuals who are experiencing signs and symptoms of a neurological syndrome of unknown cause (NSUC).

At this time, the investigation is active and ongoing to determine if there are similarities among the reported cases that can identify potential causes for this syndrome, and to help identify possible strategies for prevention. The investigation team is exploring all potential causes, including food, environmental and animal exposures.

Investigation overview
Since early 2020, physicians in New Brunswick have been identifying a number of individuals with an unusual combination of neurological symptoms. Despite extensive medical investigation, a diagnosis for these individuals has not yet been determined.

Local healthcare providers in New Brunswick have engaged the Public Health Agency of Canada's Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance System (CJDSS) to actively investigate the possibility of human prion disease, but to date, all test results have been negative for known forms of human prion disease. Due to commonalities in signs and symptoms and the lack of a confirmed diagnosis among cases, a cluster of NSUC has been identified.

At the time of referral by their healthcare provider, most of the individuals under investigation were living in the southeastern and northeastern regions of New Brunswick, around the Acadian Peninsula and Moncton areas. However, so far, our investigation has not found any evidence suggesting that the residents of these regions are more at risk than those living elsewhere in the province.

Canadian healthcare providers have been alerted to this investigation and are advised to contact New Brunswick Public Health for further information or to make referrals for individual cases.

Investigation status / Active
----------------------------
Cases under investigation / 48
Deaths / 6*
Illness onset date range in years / 2013-2020**
Gender / 50% female, 50% male
Age range in years / 18-85

*In some cases, additional information is needed to determine if the cause of death was a result of this syndrome.
**Symptoms started in 2018, 2019 or 2020 for most cases. Only one case identified retrospectively in 2020 was found to experience symptoms in 2013.

Timeline
- Between January 2019 and July 2019, New Brunswick physicians identified a potential cluster of 3 Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) cases possibly related to cataract surgery. An investigation conducted by the Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance System (CJDSS), in collaboration with Regional Health Authorities in NB, demonstrated that there was no relation between the CJD cases and the surgery.
- Through routine case management, the CJDSS noted common symptoms and diagnostic profiles among recent NB referrals that tested negative for CJD and with negative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein panels. It became apparent that these atypical referrals represented a 2nd cluster, distinct from the 1st, that was worth further investigation.
- In December 2020, the CJDSS contacted Public Health New Brunswick to actively include the department in this investigation.
- The 1st draft for the case definition was gathered on 29 Jan 2021.
- A memo was drafted regarding this case definition and sent to NB physicians on 5 Mar 2021 to inform them and encourage any healthcare provider with patients that may meet the case definition for this neurological syndrome of unknown cause, to please contact Public Health, the CJDSS or the Mind Clinic at 1-506-857-5569 for more information.

Symptoms
Some symptoms include, but are not limited to:
- Memory problems
- Muscle spasms
- Balance issues, difficulty walking or falls
- Blurred vision or visual hallucinations
- Unexplained, significant weight loss
- Behaviour changes
- Pain in the upper or lower limbs

What you can do
If you suspect that you, or your loved one, may be experiencing changes in personal health that may be similar to those described above, please speak with a healthcare provider.

As the cause of the neurological syndrome is currently unknown, only a healthcare provider can assess if the symptoms an individual is experiencing may be related to this NSUC investigation.

What the Government is doing
The Government of New Brunswick is committed to protecting the health of all citizens from new and emerging diseases in the province. The investigation is ongoing and Public Health New Brunswick will continue to investigate, working with the following partners:
- New Brunswick Department of Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries
- New Brunswick Department of Natural Resources and Energy Development
- New Brunswick Department of Environment and Local Government.
- Public Health Agency of Canada
- Canadian Food Inspection Agency

Frequently Asked Questions
What is a cluster?
A cluster is defined as several things of the same kind, and/or a group of things or persons close together. Occasionally, an outbreak or cluster of cases is discovered, for which the cause is unclear, and epidemiologists and biostatisticians must work diligently to assess whether a true cluster of disease exists.

In this investigation, the term cluster is being used because the ill individuals have similar clinical signs and symptoms that do not have a known cause and are located in the same geographical area.

Is it unusual to see this many cases of unknown neurological disease in New Brunswick?
Occasionally, an outbreak or cluster of cases is discovered, for which the cause is unclear, and epidemiologists and biostatisticians must work diligently to assess whether a true cluster of disease exists. This cluster of individuals experiencing signs and symptoms of a neurological syndrome of unknown cause in New Brunswick is unexpected, which is why the cluster is being actively investigated by Public Health New Brunswick in collaboration with the established Oversight Committee comprised of Neurologists and chaired by VPs from both RHAs. In addition, other local and national subject matter experts and healthcare providers will be engaged to identify potential causes.

Are there cases in other provinces or countries?
To date, no unusual clusters of individuals with neurological syndrome of unknown cause have been identified outside of New Brunswick. However, public health officials across Canada have been informed of this investigation and advised to contact New Brunswick Public Health for further information. The Public Health Agency of Canada has been in contact with other countries to provide further information and will be notified if cases are identified outside of Canada.

Do other cases under investigation have the same symptoms and/or severity of symptoms as (case)?
Individuals under investigation have similar symptoms that do not have a known [cause]. The most frequently reported symptoms include memory problems, muscle spasms, balance issues (e.g., difficulty walking or falls), blurred vision or visual hallucinations, unexplained and significant weight loss, behaviour changes and pain in the upper or lower limbs. The severity of symptoms varies among individuals.

What is being done to identify the cause? Are you doing any testing to find out if there are hazards in the environment?
Public Health New Brunswick has developed, with input from local and national subject matter experts, an epidemiological investigation questionnaire to gather exposure information from individuals in NB suspected of being part of this cluster. The information collected from these interviews will be analyzed to look for common exposures that can be investigated further.

The investigation team is exploring all potential causes, including food, environmental and animal exposures. At this time, there are no specific behaviours or foods that have been identified to avoid. As new information becomes available in this investigation, this will be communicated to the public through the New Brunswick Public Health webpage.

Is it safe to live in the Acadian peninsula or Moncton areas if cases who developed this disease lived here too?
At the time of referral by their healthcare provider, most of the individuals under investigation were living in the southeastern and northeastern regions of New Brunswick, around the Acadian Peninsula and Moncton areas. However, so far, the investigation has not found any evidence suggesting that the residents of these regions are more at risk than those living elsewhere in the province. As new information becomes available in this investigation, this will be communicated to the public through the New Brunswick Public Health webpage.

As the investigation evolves, this webpage will be updated to provide new information about the ongoing investigation.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2]
Date: Fri 4 Jun 2021
Source: The New York Times [edited]
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/04/world/canada/canada-brain-disease-mystery.html


Forty-eight people from the same small Canadian province struck with a baffling mix of symptoms including insomnia, impaired motor function and hallucinations such as nightmarish visions of the dead.

A quixotic neurologist working 12-hour days to decipher the clues.

Swirling conspiracy theories blaming the illness on cellphone towers, fracking or even COVID-19 vaccines.

These are just some plot lines of a mystery that has stumped Canada's medical establishment, attracted the attention of some of the world's top neurologists and fanned fears among residents of New Brunswick, a picturesque province of about 770 000 on Canada's Atlantic coast. In the past 6 years, dozens of people have fallen ill from the disease and 6 people have died.

"People are alarmed," said Yvon Godin, the mayor of Bertrand, a village in the Acadian Peninsula in northeastern New Brunswick where residents have been afflicted. "They are asking, 'Is it environmental? Is it genetic? Is it fish or deer meat? Is it something else?' Everyone wants answers."

As the coronavirus raged across the country the past 15 months, the medical enigma was initially slow to gain national attention. Canadian health authorities, distracted by the need to respond to the pandemic, scrambled to determine the seriousness of the outbreak, which was only publicly exposed after a memo about it by New Brunswick's chief medical officer was leaked to the press in March [2021].

Doctors investigating the disease say the sluggish response underlines the challenge for other medical conditions to compete for the spotlight during a global pandemic.

Medical experts said the murkiness surrounding the illness also reflected how, despite extraordinary advances in medical science, some conditions, in particular neurological diseases involving dementia, can puzzle even the world's best scientific brains.

The Canadian outbreak could join the pantheon of other ailments that have mystified the world, such as the debilitating illness that impaired dozens of diplomats in Cuba and China beginning in 2016, prompting suspicions that victims may have been targeted by Moscow, Beijing or a rogue government. There was also a painful and puzzling kidney disease that afflicted workers harvesting sugar cane in Nicaragua 4 years earlier.

The mystery, however, could also fizzle, if it turns out that a variety of pre-existing conditions have been prematurely ascribed to a strange new disease.

Among the youngest victims of the Canadian syndrome is Gabrielle Cormier, 20, once a straight-A student who participated in figure skating competitions and aspired to become a pathologist.

But as she began university 2 years ago, Ms. Cormier said she was suddenly and inexplicably overcome by fatigue, started bumping into things and had visions that looked like static from a television. No longer able to read easily or walk to class, she was forced to drop out of school.

Not understanding what was wrong amplified the illness's horror. After being misdiagnosed with mononucleosis, Ms. Cormier said emergency room doctors then told her there was nothing wrong with her. A battery of tests yielded no diagnosis. She was eventually referred to a neurologist as her health deteriorated and she experienced involuntary jerking movements, memory lapses and hallucinations. She was among the 1st to be included in the cluster of those suffering from the unidentified syndrome.

Today, she lives at home in Dalhousie Junction, in rural northern New Brunswick, and walks with a cane. "I was just starting what is supposed to be the best chapter of your life and then it disappeared," she said. "I don't know if I will die or live out the rest of my life with these symptoms."

Dr. Neil Cashman, a neurologist at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, who is investigating the illness, said it was a medical whodunit of the type seen only a couple of times a century.

"From the standpoint of a mystery, there is usually something horrible like a murder -- in this case it is rapidly progressive dementia, and psychiatric manifestations, losing everything at once that is controlled by the brain and the spinal cord," he said. "It is terrifying."

But other medical experts questioned the condition's novelty.

Dr. Michael D. Geschwind, a professor of neurology at the University of California, San Francisco, who is one of the world's leading experts on rare neurological outbreaks, hasn't studied the cases or autopsies of those affected. But he cautioned that what can seem like a new illness sometimes turns out to be a known disease that hasn't been diagnosed. Those affected, he added, could end up suffering from a "grab bag" of disparate neurodegenerative diseases that were being linked together.

"Sometimes what seems to be a cluster turns out to be something else," he said.

The disease was first observed in 2015 when a New Brunswick neurologist, Dr. Alier Marrero, saw a patient who presented a bizarre mix of symptoms including anxiety, depression, rapidly progressive dementia, muscle pains and frightening visual disturbances.

Three years later, he had 8 total cases. The next year the total was 20. Then 38. Then 48.

The patients range in age from 18 to 84 and live primarily in 2 areas of New Brunswick: Moncton and the Acadian Peninsula.

Baffled by what he was observing, Dr. Marrero, a physician at Dr. Georges-L.-Dumont University Hospital Center in Moncton, ordered blood tests, spinal taps, MRI scans and electroencephalograms.

Dr. Marrero said the tests revealed abnormalities such as brain atrophy and neurological dysfunction, but none of the results linked together to form a clear diagnosis.

He initially suspected Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disease that is thought to be caused by prions, novel infectious agents that damage the brain. But the patients tested negative for known forms of CJD.

He scoured medical texts. He consulted with colleagues across the world. Eventually, he said, only one conclusion made sense: "It was not something we have seen before."

With no diagnosis, he gave the devastating disease a decidedly prosaic working name: Neurological Syndrome of Unknown Etiology in New Brunswick. He also sounded the alarm, notifying colleagues and federal and provincial health authorities.

In April [2021], 6 years after the 1st cases emerged, health authorities in New Brunswick and Ottawa, Canada's capital, assembled a team of neurologists, epidemiologists, environmentalists and veterinarians to investigate. Brain autopsies of the 6 victims are being analyzed at a federal laboratory in Ottawa, while a team of neurologists and pathologists from across Canada is reviewing the evidence.

Of the 3 autopsies done so far, all have been negative for known forms of prion disease, according to Dr. Michael Coulthart, a neurologist who is leading the investigation.

Medical investigators said the list of potential causes had been winnowed down to 4 or 5.

Dr. Cashman, the University of British Columbia neurologist, said one line of inquiry was that the disease could be caused by a toxin known as beta-methylamino-L-alanine, or BMAA, which is produced by blue-green algae and has been linked to diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

Another potential culprit, he said, is chronic exposure to Domoic acid, a neurotoxin found in shellfish from off the coast of New Brunswick. He said the team was not ruling out that it could be a new prion disease or a syndrome caused by an infectious agent such as bacteria, a virus or a fungus.

Some families of those suffering from the symptoms are angry that health authorities took so long to reveal them. Steven Ellis, whose father, Roger, is part of the New Brunswick outbreak, said his family wanted to know whether the condition was genetic or caused by an external factor. Once jovial and active, his father is now confined to a nursing home and has suffered weight loss, irritability and delusions.

Only after reading the leaked New Brunswick public health officer's internal memo about the syndrome in March [2021] did Mr. Ellis connect it to his father's illness. "It was like reading our private family story," he recalled. "The pandemic overshadowed this disease," he added. "Why did it take so long for this to become public?"

Dr. Jennifer Russell, New Brunswick's chief medical officer, told a news conference in April [2021] that provincial health authorities had prudently reacted once federal health officials determined that the number of cases was significant. There is a "long road ahead" to determine the cause, she said.

But Mr. Ellis said families like his were running out of time. "If my dad had terminal cancer, of course it would be upsetting, but at least there would be a prognosis," he said. "We are watching him dying a slow death and nobody can tell us why."

[Byline: Dan Bilefsky]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[3]
Date: Thu 3 Jun 2021
Source: Department of Health, Government of New Brunswick [edited]
https://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/news/news_release.2021.06.0431.html


An oversight committee has been established by the provincial government to oversee the clinical and investigative work associated with a neurological syndrome of unknown cause.

"New Brunswickers are concerned and confused about this potential neurological syndrome," said Health Minister Dorothy Shephard. "We must work together to ensure due diligence."

The committee will review all the case files of affected patients, provide 2nd opinions on the identified cases, ensure due diligence and rule out other potential causes.

Dr. Natalie Banville, of Vitalite Health Network, and Dr. Edouard Hendriks, of Horizon Health Network, have been appointed co-chairs of the oversight committee. The committee will consist of the 2 co-chairs, 6 neurologists and one member from Public Health.

The committee's work will involve:
- A clinical review of:
*medical charts and records of identified affected individuals;
*relevant data obtained from questionnaires completed by their caregivers; and
*information obtained from the Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance System.
- Identifying patients, or subset of them, that may need to be re-interviewed or require new examinations or evaluations and further testing.
- Identifying gaps in the electronic medical records and recommending areas for improvement.
- Reviewing case definition and recommendations for changes.
- Identifying the potential requirement for further laboratory/pathology testing of human samples, including recommendations related to what should be tested for and which samples should be captured.
- Scanning of potentially applicable research.

Additional experts who may be required or invited as needed may include behavioural neurologists, geriatric psychiatrists, neuropathologists, and/or neuro psychometrists.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[The above updates provide a good summation of what is known about the disease so far; essentially the illness can be categorized as a syndrome of neurological symptoms and signs, and the etiology is still unclear whether it is an infectious agent -- such as bacteria, a virus or a fungus -- or a toxin. This puts forth many questions: susceptible population, risk factors, mode(s) of transmission, potential burden of this illness. The oversight committee can start to address some of them through a comprehensive review. - Mod.UBA

HealthMap/ProMED map:
New Brunswick Province, Canada: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8433060,269]
See Also
Undiagnosed neurological illness - Canada (02): (NB) RFI 20210506.8347534
Undiagnosed neurological illness - Canada: (NB) fatal, RFI 20210323.8256422
.................................................uba/rd/ml
</body>
