<header id=037270>
Published Date: 2014-06-13 11:49:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic 1918 virus: genes identified with pandemic potential
Archive Number: 20140613.2538612
</header>
<body id=037270>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC 1918 VIRUS: GENES IDENTIFIED WITH PANDEMIC POTENTIAL
***********************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this posting:
[1] Identification of genes with pandemic potential
[2] Comment

******
[1] Identification of genes with pandemic potential
Date: Wed 11 Jun 2014
Source: Scientific Blogging, Science 2.0, University of Wisconsin-Madison report [edited]
http://www.science20.com/news_articles/genes_found_in_nature_yield_1918like_virus_with_pandemic_potential-138363


Genes found in nature yield 1918-like virus with pandemic potential
-------------------------------------------------------------------
An international team of researchers has shown that circulating avian influenza viruses contain all the genetic ingredients necessary to underpin the emergence of a virus similar to the deadly 1918 influenza virus. Searching public databases, the researchers, led by Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, identified 8 genes from influenza viruses isolated from wild ducks that possessed remarkable genetic similarities to the genes that made up the 1918 pandemic flu virus. The 1918 or "Spanish flu" pandemic was one of recorded history's most devastating outbreaks of disease, resulting in an estimated 40 million deaths worldwide.

The new work was published today (1 Jun 2014) in the journal Cell Host and Microbe. It shows that "there are gene pools in nature that have the potential to cause a severe pandemic in the future," says Kawaoka, a international authority on influenza and the senior author of the new report. To assess the risk posed by a virus that could acquire all 8 of the 1918-like genes, the team used reverse genetics methods to generate a virus that differed from the 1918 virus by only 3 per cent of the amino acids that make the virus proteins. The resulting virus was more pathogenic in mice and ferrets than an ordinary avian flu virus, but was not as pathogenic as the 1918 virus and it did not transmit in ferrets via respiratory droplets, the primary mode of flu transmission.

Since pandemic risk escalates when a virus become transmissible, Kawaoka's group then conducted additional experiments to determine how many changes would be required for the avian 1918-like virus to become transmissible in ferrets, a well accepted model for influenza transmission studies. The researchers identified 7 mutations in 3 viral genes that enabled the pathogen to transmit as efficiently as the 1918 virus [in ferrets]. The resulting virus, composed of genetic factors circulating in wild and domesticated birds, demonstrates that the genetic ingredients for a potentially deadly and pandemic pathogen exist in nature and could combine to form such a virus, according to Kawaoka.

The new study is important because it shows the potential risk of circulating strains of avian influenza viruses, Kawaoka explains. Knowing what genes to look for, he says, can help predict the likelihood of an emerging strain of pandemic flu and, importantly, help scientists devise strategies for countering such a pathogen. Critically, the research provides additional insight and evidence for the mechanisms responsible for adaptation of avian influenza viruses to mammals. One mutation in the novel transmissible 1918-like avian virus, for example, is responsible for increased virus growth in mammalian cells. Mutations in hemagglutinin, a protein found on the surface of influenza viruses that binds to host cells, alter the protein's stability, a change that could potentially enhance the virus's ability to infect the upper respiratory tract of humans. The same mechanisms were associated with effective transmission of H5N1 avian viruses, as reported in an earlier study, and the newly emergent H7N9 virus infecting humans in China also seems to possess some of the same qualities.

A key finding of the new study, notes Kawaoka, is that sera from individuals vaccinated with the current seasonal influenza vaccine (which protects against 2009 H1N1 influenza, a related virus) reacted with the novel transmissible 1918-like avian virus. That discovery suggests that protection against a potential pandemic threat exists in the currently available vaccine. In addition, the team showed that the novel transmissible virus is expected to be sensitive to the antiviral medication oseltamivir.

The transmission studies were conducted under specially designed high-containment conditions, using commensurate biosafety practices, at UW-Madison with approval of the university's Institutional Biosafety Committee. The draft manuscript was reviewed by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), in keeping with the institute's implementation of the United States Government Policy for Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern.

"The point of the study was to assess the risk of avian viruses currently circulating in nature," explains Kawaoka, who, in addition to his appointment as a professor in the UW-Madison School of Veterinary Medicine, holds a faculty position at the University of Tokyo. "We found genes in avian influenza viruses quite closely related to the 1918 virus and, to evaluate the pandemic potential should such a 1918-like avian virus emerge, identified changes that enabled it to transmit in ferrets. "With each study, we learn more about the key features that enable an avian influenza virus to adapt to mammals and become transmissible," says Kawaoka. "Eventually, we hope to be able to reliably identify viruses with significant pandemic potential so we can focus preparedness efforts appropriately."

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The reference for the article in Cell Host & Microbe is:
Watanabe T, Zhong G, Russel CA, et al. Circulating avian influenza viruses closely related to the 1918 virus have pandemic potential. Cell Host & Microbe; 15(6): 692-705; available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2014.05.006
- Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

******
[2] Comment
Date: Wed 11 Jun 2014
Source: The Guardian Newspaper [edited]
http://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jun/11/crazy-dangerous-creation-deadly-airborne-flu-virus


Scientists condemn 'crazy, dangerous' creation of deadly airborne flu virus
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Scientists have created a life-threatening virus that closely resembles the 1918 Spanish flu strain that killed an estimated 50 million people in an experiment labelled as "crazy" by opponents. US researchers said the experiments were crucial for understanding the public health risk posed by viruses currently circulating in wild birds, but critics condemned the studies as dangerous and called on funders to stop the work.

Scientists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison used a technique called reverse "genetics" to build the virus from fragments of wild bird flu strains. They then mutated the virus to make it airborne to spread more easily from one animal to another. "The work they are doing is absolutely crazy. The whole thing is exceedingly dangerous," said Lord May, a former president of the Royal Society and one time chief science adviser to the UK government. "Yes, there is a danger, but it's not arising form the viruses out there in the animals, it's arising from the labs of grossly ambitious people." Influenza viruses circulate freely in wild bird populations. Most remain in chickens, ducks, and other birds, but occasionally strains mutate into a form that can infect humans. The H5N1 bird flu strain has killed at least 386 people since 2003, according to WHO figures. The Spanish 1918 flu is thought to have come from birds too.

Writing in the journal "Cell Host & Microbe" Yoshihiro Kawaoka describes how his team analysed various bird flu viruses and found genes from several strains that were very similar to those that made up the 1918 human flu virus. They combined the bird flu genes into a single new virus, making a new pathogen that was only about 3 per cent different from the 1918 human virus. The freshly made virus -- the 1st of several the team created -- was more harmful to mice and ferrets than normal bird flu viruses, but not as dangerous as the 1918 strain. It did not spread between ferrets and none of the animals died. But the scientists went on to mutate the virus, to see what changes could make it spread. 7 mutations later, they had a more dangerous version that spread easily from animal to animal in tiny water droplets, the same way flu spreads in humans. Kawaoka, who led the research in a high-security lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said the work highlighted how flu viruses found in wild bird populations had the potential to adapt to humans and cause a pandemic. Follow-up experiments showed that the 2009 swine flu vaccine and the anti-viral drug tamiflu should be effective against the virus. "This is important information for those making decisions about surveillance and pandemic preparedness," Kawaoka told the Guardian.

The work is the latest in a series of controversial studies that have split the scientific community. On the one side are researchers who create dangerous viruses in secure labs in the hope of learning how existing strains could mutate to make them a potential threat to humans. On the other are scientists who argue the work does little or nothing to help protect people, but instead puts the global population in more danger. Marc Lipsitch, professor of epidemiology at Harvard School of Public Health, said: "I am worried that this signals a growing trend to make transmissible novel viruses willy-nilly, without strong public health rationale. This is a risky activity, even in the safest labs. Scientists should not take such risks without strong evidence that the work could save lives, which this paper does not provide," he added. In an article published last month [May 2014], Lipsitch argued that experiments like Kawaoka's could unleash a catastrophic pandemic if a virus escaped or was intentionally released from a high-security laboratory.

But Kawaoka defended the work, saying that critics failed to appreciate the impact of his and others' work on dangerous viruses. "There were discussions on the usefulness of stockpiling H5N1 [bird flu] vaccines until our H5N1 papers were published. Similarly, this paper strongly supports stockpiling anti-influenza drugs. If this is not a 'lifesaving benefit', what is?" he said.

Many of the groups that create dangerous viruses to understand their workings are funded by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH). Lord May said he suspected the NIH supported the work because officials there were "incompetent" and believed the justifications that scientists told them. "This is work that shouldn't be done. It's as simple as that," he said.

The experiments show that a 1918-like flu virus could emerge in the wild as bird viruses swap genes and mutate. "Influenza viruses readily swap genes to generate new viruses, so something like this could happen, especially since many of these viruses have circulated in recent years," Kawaoka said. The viruses "have the potential to become adapted to mammals and possibly cause a human pandemic," he added. The study identifies particular mutations that made the virus spread so easily. But that is not much use for surveillance, said Lipsitch, because there are scores of other mutations that could have the same effect. "The chance that a virus very similar to the one they study will appear in nature is extremely remote," he said. Kawaoka argues that his team is fully aware of this, and that the underlying mechanisms that make the virus so dangerous are more important for preventing future pandemics.

Simon Wain-Hobson, a virologist at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, said he feared that governments and funding bodies would only take the risks seriously once an accident had happened. "It's madness, folly. It shows profound lack of respect for the collective decision-making process we've always shown in fighting infections. If society, the intelligent layperson, understood what was going on, they would say 'What the F are you doing?'"

Carole Heilman, director of Microbiology and infectious diseases at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in the US, said: "This study was conducted as part of a research project on understanding the molecular mechanisms of virulence of the 1918 influenza virus. NIH peer review determined that the research was scientifically meritorious. It was also determined that the information gained had the potential to help public health agencies in their assessment of circulating and newly emerging strains. In addition, NIH determined that all the research was being done under appropriate biosafety conditions and with appropriate risk mitigation measures."

[byline: Ian Sample]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The overall conclusion is that the assembly of a comparatively few already existing mutations is sufficient to generate an avian influenza virus with the pathogenic potential similar to that of the highly lethal influenza virus responsible for the H1N1 pandemic of 1918 (Spanish flu), and that these genes are still circulating in avian viruses. Kawaoka and colleagues, who carried out this research in a high-security lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, have concluded that their research has identified flu virus genes in wild bird populations that had the potential to adapt to humans hosts and create a pandemic virus as dangerous as the H1N1 pandemic virus of 1918.

This study was conducted as part of a research project on understanding the molecular mechanisms of virulence of the 1918 influenza virus. NIH peer review determined that the research was scientifically meritorious. It used reverse genetics methods to generate a virus that differed from the 1918 virus by only 3 per cent of the amino acids that make the virus proteins. The resulting virus was more pathogenic in mice and ferrets than an ordinary avian flu virus, but was not as pathogenic as the 1918 virus and it did not transmit in ferrets via respiratory droplets, the primary mode of flu virus transmission. The experiments showed that a 1918-like flu virus could emerge by the swapping of genes and subsequent mutation. "Influenza viruses readily swap genes to generate new viruses, so something like this could happen, since existing viruses with many of these genes have circulated in recent years," stated Kawaoka. Such viruses "have the potential to become adapted to mammals and possibly cause a human pandemic," he added.

These experiments are controversial, but what has been done has been done, and it is perhaps time to move on.

A question that should be addressed now is why it is approaching 100 years since appearance of an influenza virus with the pathogenic potential of the Spanish flu virus, despite the continued existence of appropriate genes. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2012
---
Influenza pandemic 1918 virus: further insight 20120913.1291873
1999
---
Influenza pandemic, 1918: archeology 19990223.0245
1998
---
Influenza, 1918 pandemic (02): Islands 19981217.2385
Influenza, 1918 pandemic (03): New Guinea 19981217.2386
Influenza, 1918 pandemic: RFI 19981207.2346
1997
---
Influenza pandemic, 1918: archeology (03) 19971018.2146
Influenza pandemic, 1918: archeology (02) 19971013.2128
Influenza pandemic, 1918: archeology 19971007.2111
Influenza pandemic, 1918 (04) 19970924.2006
Influenza pandemic, 1918 (02) 19970324.0618
Influenza pandemic, 1918 (03) 19970324.0625
Influenza pandemic, 1918 19970321.0598
.................................................sb/cp/mj/sh
</body>
