<header id=017269>
Published Date: 2022-05-06 21:36:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis, undefined, global (07): children, possible adenovirus, 2021-2022
Archive Number: 20220507.8703088
</header>
<body id=017269>
HEPATITIS, UNDEFINED, GLOBAL (07): CHILDREN, POSSIBLE ADENOVIRUS, 2021-2022
***************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] USA: CDC
[2] USA: states
[3[ UKHSA
[4] Spain
[5] Panama
[6] Costa Rica
[7] Japan

******
[1] USA: CDC
Date: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: CNN [abridged, edited]
https://www.cnn.com/2022/05/06/health/hepatitis-kids-cdc-update/index.html


CDC investigating more than 100 cases of unexplained hepatitis in children, including 5 deaths
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CDC said Friday [6 May 2022] that it is investigating 109 cases of severe and unexplained hepatitis in children in 25 states that may be linked to a worldwide outbreak. Eight children needed liver transplants and 5 have died. Nearly all the children, at 94%, needed to be hospitalized.

Dr. Jay Butler, the CDC's deputy director of infectious diseases stressed that the investigation, a partnership between the CDC and state health departments, is an evolving situation. Not all the hepatitis cases they are studying now may ultimately be caused by the same thing.

Hepatitis, or swelling of the liver, can be caused by infections, autoimmune diseases, drugs and toxins including viruses well known for attacking the liver causing hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. It is not yet clear what's driving these cases in young children. Butler said some of the common causes of viral hepatitis have been considered, but were not found in any of the cases. Adenovirus has been detected in some of the children, although its role is not clear.

Early hepatitis reports
-----------------------
On [21 Apr 2022], the CDC alerted doctors to a cluster of unusual cases of hepatitis in 9 children in Alabama. The agency asked doctors and public health officials to notify it if they had similar cases of children under the age of 10 with elevated liver enzymes and no apparent explanation for their hepatitis dating back to October [2021].

Since then, state health departments have been working with pediatric specialists in their states to identify possible cases. The numbers shared at Friday's news briefing [6 May 2022] are the first national look at cases in the USA.

The CDC's alert followed earlier reports from the UK and Europe of dozens of children from England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland coming to hospitals with unexplained hepatitis. As of [1 May 2022], there are 228 probable cases linked to the outbreak in 20 countries, with more than 50 cases under investigation, Dr. Philippa Easterbrook, a senior scientist in the WHO's Global Hepatitis Program, said in a briefing on Wednesday [4 May 2022]. Among these cases, one child has died and around 18 have needed liver transplants, Easterbrook said.

Most of the children were healthy when they developed symptoms that included fatigue, loss of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, belly pain, dark urine, light colored stools and yellowing of their skin and eyes -- a sign called jaundice.
.
Unusually severe liver inflammation
-----------------------------------
Doctors who have treated these children say their cases stood out. "Even during the 1st case, I thought it was weird," says Dr. Markus Buchfellner, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, where they first started seeing cases in October [2021].

"And then when the 2nd one came in that is when I said okay, we need to talk to someone about this." He reached out to senior physicians in his department who contacted the state health department and the CDC. Buchfellner says the cases stood out because their liver inflammation was so severe.

Sometimes, common viruses like Epstein-Barr or even SARS-CoV2 will raise a child's liver enzymes a little, indicating what Buchfellner calls "small bits of hepatitis," but the kids typically recover as their bodies fight off the infection. "But it is very odd to see a child who is healthy come in with the amount of liver injury that these kids had," he said. Initially, UAB saw 9 kids with unexplained hepatitis, and all 9 tested positive for adenovirus in their blood. Since those cases were first reported, 2 more children in Alabama have been identified, and their cases are under investigation, bringing the state's total to 11 cases under investigation, said Dr. Wes Stubblefield, medical officer for Alabama's Northern and Northeastern Districts in an interview with CNN.

There are about 100 different kinds of adenoviruses. About 50 of them are known to infect humans, so they needed a closer look at the virus to try to figure out if all the children had the same one. When researchers tried to read the genes of the adenovirus in infected kids, only 5 had enough genetic material to get a full sequence. In all 5, the virus was a particular kind of adenovirus called adenovirus 41, which typically causes diarrhea and vomiting in kids, sometimes with congestion or a cough, but has never before been associated with liver failure.

Clues from the UK
-----------------
In addition to the CDC briefing, researchers with the UK Health Security Agency on Friday [6 May 2022], posted (see below) a new technical briefing with an update on its hepatitis investigation. Out of 163 cases, 126 patients have been tested for adenovirus, and 91, or 72% were positive for that pathogen. Investigators have tried to sequence the entire genome of an adenovirus from one of the patients, but have not yet been able to get a sample with enough of the virus to do that. Out of 18 cases where they were able to partially sequence the genome of the virus, all 18 have been adenovirus 41F, the same one found in the US cases.

Many have wondered whether the cases may somehow be related to SARS-CoV2, the virus that causes COVID-19. UK investigators say they're still looking at that possibility, but only 24 out of 132 patients tested -- 18% -- had SARS-CoV2 detected. The report says they are not ruling out some role for a COVID-19 infection in these cases. Perhaps a prior COVID-19 infection somehow primed the immune system to make these children unusually susceptible, or maybe a co-infection of the 2 viruses together overwhelms the liver. Researchers also want to know if maybe the hepatitis is part of some kind of syndrome that strikes kids after a SARS-CoV2 infection, as the rare complication multisystem inflammtory syndrome in children, or MIS-C, does.

Another working theory from UK investigators is that maybe there's some kind of outsized or irregular immune response in these children, perhaps because they were sheltered more than usual during the pandemic. Yet another theory is that the adenovirus may have always caused liver failure in a tiny percentage of children who were infected, and these rare cases are only coming to light because it is causing an exceptionally large wave of infections. Investigators in the UK say they are still testing for drugs, toxins, or perhaps an environmental exposure, even though some kind of infection is probably more likely to be the cause.

Sorting out the role of adenovirus 41
-------------------------------------
Another thing that's puzzled doctors, Buchfellner says, is that they found adenovirus in blood samples, but not in samples of liver tissue taken during biopsies of the patients in Alabama. "All 9 of them have liver biopsies that were showing lots of inflammation. And hepatitis. But we did not find the virus in the liver. We only found the virus in the blood," he said. If this adenovirus 41 is somehow responsible in these cases, and that's still a big if, Buchfellner says he doesn't know why it would only show up in the blood, but not in heavily damaged liver tissue, but he has some theories.

"Maybe the liver is clearing the virus before it has been cleared in the blood," he said. "And so by the time that the damage has been done to the liver, and we do the biopsy, the immune system has already cleared the virus from the liver. And what's left over is just inflammation."

His 2nd theory is that it's not the virus itself that's responsible for the liver damage, but perhaps the immune system overreacts when trying to fight off the virus and ends up damaging the liver.

According to the CDC, some of the causes that have been ruled out so far include:
• Hepatitis viruses A, B, and C [and D and E. Mod.LL]
• SARS-CoV-2 infection
• Autoimmune hepatitis
• A rare genetic disorder called Wilson disease

[Byline: Brenda Goodman]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[2] USA: states
Date: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: Today [abridged, edited]
https://www.today.com/health/health/pediatric-hepatitis-america-states-reported-cases-rcna27546


Mystery hepatitis outbreak in kids: Which states are investigating cases?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A pediatric hepatitis outbreak with mysterious origins is continuing to grow, as more USA states investigate cases of kids developing the liver illness without a known cause.

The first reported cases in the USA were in Alabama in October [2021]. The CDC has issued an alert and a report on the cluster of 9 cases. All of the children, between 1 and 6 in age, tested positive for an adenovirus, which the CDC and WHO are investigating as a possible cause of the global outbreak, but it has not been confirmed. Five of the Alabama children tested positive for a specific type of adenovirus, adenovirus 41.

Adenoviruses are common, usually causing cold-like and gastrointestinal symptoms. Prior to these cases, adenoviruses were not known to cause hepatitis in otherwise healthy children, per the CDC. In Alabama and in many other cases, the children were previously healthy.

"There's no link to one geographic area, common exposure to particular foods or animals, travel or to toxins," Dr. Philippa Easterbrook, an infectious disease physician with the WHO, said during a media briefing Wednesday [4 May 2022].

Most of the children are too young to have received the COVID-19 vaccine and do not have any evidence of a COVID-19 infection.

The following states are investigating cases of pediatric hepatitis with an unknown cause:
- Alabama: the 1st report the CDC issued on the mysterious hepatitis focused on a cluster of 9 cases spread across different parts of Alabama.
- Minnesota: the Minnesota Department of Health is investigating "several cases" of hepatitis in kids with an unknown cause, local NBC affiliate KARE 11 reported in late April [2022].
- Wisconsin: as of late April [2022], the Wisconsin Department of Health is investigating at least 4 cases of unusual hepatitis in children, including 1 death and 1 liver transplant.
- South Dakota: the South Dakota Department of Health is investigating a case in a child under 10 years old in Brown County, it announced Wednesday [4 May 2022].
- North Dakota: a child in Grand Forks County is recovering at home after being hospitalized with hepatitis with an unknown cause, the North Dakota Health Department announced Thursday [5 May 2022].
- Illinois: the Illinois Department of Health announced in late April [2022] that it is investigating "3 suspected cases of severe hepatitis in children under 10 years of age, potentially linked to a strain of adenovirus. Two of the cases are in suburban Chicago and 1 is in Western Illinois."
- Ohio: doctors at Cincinnati Children's Hospital in Ohio told NBC News that they had treated at least 6 cases in kids between 18 months and 10 years old, all of whom were from Ohio. One child needed a liver transplant.
- Delaware: one case is being investigated in Delaware, NBC News reported in late April [2022].
- Georgia: the health department in Georgia said it was also investigating a "handful" of cases as of late April [2022], according to NBC News.
- Louisiana: in late April [2022], NBC News reported one case was being investigated in Louisiana.
- New York: New York health officials are investigating a "handful" of cases of hepatitis in kids with an unknown origin, NBC News reported in late April [2022].
- North Carolina: 2 cases of the rare liver inflammation were reported in school-age children in North Carolina, local NBC affiliate WCNC reported in late April [2022].
- Tennessee: the Tennessee Department of Health has reported 6 cases as of late April 2022, according to NBC News.
- California: the California Department of Public Health told TODAY in a statement on Thu 5 May 2022 that it has "received reports of 7 young children in California with severe hepatitis since October 2021. We do not know yet if adenovirus played a role in these rare illnesses or if these cases are connected."
- Idaho: the Idaho Department of Health is currently investigating 2 cases pediatric acute hepatitis of unknown origin, it told TODAY in a statement.
- Texas: University of Texas Health San Antonio has "seen cases of a mysterious and serious liver disease in otherwise healthy children" in South Texas, according to a statement. The Texas Department of State Health Services told TODAY in a [6 May 2022] statement that the state has no confirmed cases of pediatric hepatitis associated with adenovirus 41. "We are aware that some local health departments are investigating cases of pediatric hepatitis to determine if they are associated with adenovirus type 41," it said, adding that the investigations are ongoing.
- Colorado: after asking health providers in late April [2022] to start reporting cases of pediatric hepatitis with an unknown cause, the Colorado Department of Health told TODAY in a [5 May 2022] statement that it received one reported case that dated back to December 2021. The child was under 10 and tested negative for adenovirus at the time.
- Missouri: a spokesperson for the Missouri Department of Health told TODAY via email that the state is investigating cases, but none are confirmed at this time.
- Maryland: "We continue to investigate reports from Maryland providers but have not yet reported any confirmed cases," a spokesperson for the Maryland Department of Health told TODAY in a [6 May 2022] statement.
- Indiana: "Indiana currently has 4 pediatric patients with non-viral hepatitis under investigation. Please note that this is an ongoing investigation, so these are not confirmed cases at this time," an Indiana health official told TODAY in a [6 May 2022] statement.

Which states have not reported cases?
-------------------------------------
Health officials from the following states told TODAY they were either not investigating any possible cases or not reporting any confirmed cases at this time:
- Mississippi -- not investigating any cases
- Virginia -- no confirmed cases
- Rhode Island -- no reported cases
- Maine -- not investigating any cases
- Vermont -- no reported cases
- Oklahoma -- not investigating any cases
- Wyoming -- not investigating any cases
- Florida -- no confirmed cases

The remaining states and Washington, DC, have yet to respond to TODAY's request for comment.

[Byline: Maura Hohman]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[3] UKHSA
Date: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: UK Health Security Agency [edited]
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1073704/acute-hepatitis-technical-briefing-2.pdf


[The entire technical briefing can be found at the original URL. - Mod.LL]

Summary:
This briefing is produced to share data useful to other public health investigators and academic partners undertaking related work. Although a detailed clinical case review is also taking place, that data is not shared here as, given the small number of cases, there are some risks to confidentiality.

Cases:
As of 3 May 2022, there have been 163 cases of acute non-A-E hepatitis with serum transaminases greater than 500 IU/L identified in children aged under 16 years old in the UK since 1 Jan 2022. This is the result of an active case finding investigation commencing in April [2022] which identified retrospective as well as prospective cases. Eleven cases have received a liver transplant. No cases resident in the UK have died.

New cases continue to be identified. While there is some apparent reduction in confirmed cases in the past 2 weeks overall in the UK, there are continued new case reports in Scotland, the number of cases pending classification in England is substantial and the likely reporting lags mean that we cannot yet say there is a decrease in new cases. Cases pending classification are usually those in which laboratory testing to rule out known causes of hepatitis has not been completed.

Working hypotheses:
The working hypotheses have been refined. The leading hypotheses remain those which involve adenovirus. However, we continue to investigate the potential role of SARS-CoV-2 and to work on ruling out any toxicological component.

Associated pathogens:
Adenovirus remains the most frequently detected potential pathogen. Amongst 163 UK cases, 126 have been tested for adenovirus of which 91 had adenovirus detected (72%). Among cases the adenovirus has primarily been detected in blood. On review of some of the adenovirus negative cases it was notable that some had only been tested on respiratory or fecal samples, and some had been tested on serum or plasma rather than whole blood (whole blood being the optimal sample). It is therefore not possible to definitively rule out adenovirus in these cases.

SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in 24 cases of 132 with available results (18%). SARS-CoV-2 serological testing is in process. A range of other possible pathogens have been detected in a low proportion of cases and are of uncertain significance, although the inclusive nature of the UKHSA case definition intentionally will pick up some cases of non-A-E hepatitis with recognised causes.

Adenovirus characterization:
Typing by partial hexon gene sequencing consistently shows that the adenovirus present in blood is type 41F (18 of 18 cases with an available result). Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has been attempted on multiple samples from cases but the low viral load in blood samples, and limited clinical material from historic cases, mean that it has not been possible to get a good quality full adenovirus genome from a case as yet.

Metagenomics:
Metagenomics undertaken on blood and liver tissue has detected primarily adeno-associated virus 2 (AAV-2) in high quantities. While contamination was originally suspected, AAV-2 is now detected in multiple samples from different hospital sources and tested in more than one sequencing laboratory. This finding is of uncertain significance and may represent a normal reactivation of AAV-2 during an acute viral infection (for example, adenovirus) or during liver injury of another cause. It is not unusual to detect bystander, reactivating or other incidental species during metagenomic sequencing. However, given the presence of AAV-2 in a number of cases, the significance will be further explored through testing of additional sets of controls.

Toxicology:
Toxicological investigations continue with no positive findings to date. Detection of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is likely to be related to appropriate therapeutic use (also noted in the trawling questionnaires) which would not be a concern, however verification work is being undertaken to confirm this.

Host investigations:
Host (for example, immunological) investigations require full research consent and are undertaken under the International Severe Acute Respiratory and emerging Infection Consortium (ISARIC) Clinical Characterisation Protocol. A total of 37 cases have been recruited to the ISARIC clinical characterization protocol to date and retrospective and prospective recruitment continues.

Selected text:

3.4 Possible exposures:
Investigations have included interviews of parents conducted by public health specialists to assess a broad range of different exposures (trawling questionnaires), as reported in the Acute hepatitis: technical briefing 1. In the 1st 60 case patients in England with data available, no notable features or common exposures were observed in travel, family structure, parental occupation, diet, water source or potential exposures to toxicants, and no association with prior immunosuppression. The public health agencies of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland report similar findings through their investigations. Public Health Scotland also report that there are 2 pairs of epidemiologically linked cases.

Review of UK trawling questionnaire responses has found relatively high numbers of dog-owning families or other dog exposures in cases (64 of 92 where data was available, 70%). The significance of this finding is being explored. Pet dog ownership is common in the UK. There are limited data on background rates of pet ownership in families of young children, non-household dog contact reporting may include transient non-significant contact, and the nature of trawling questionnaire investigations mean that some responses may be high through the play of chance due to the large numbers of questions asked.

Approximately 3/4 of respondents in data for England mentioned paracetamol (acetaminophen) use. Fewer reported ibuprofen use and none reported aspirin use. While paracetamol is an important hepatotoxic agent in overdose, there have been no reports of paracetamol hepatoxic presentations or histories from any of the clinical units. The prevalence of paracetamol use is considered consistent with guidance on management of acute illness in children.

COVID-19 vaccinations are not recommended by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation for children aged under 5. They are available for children aged 5 and over. There were no COVID-19 vaccinations recorded in cases aged under 5, the age group which makes up over 75% of hepatitis cases. There are fewer than 5 older case-patients recorded as having had a COVID-19 vaccination prior to hepatitis onset. There is no evidence of a link between COVID-19 vaccination and the acute hepatic syndrome.

5.2 Adenovirus:
Adenovirus was the most common pathogen detected. Amongst 163 UK cases, 126 have been tested for adenovirus of which 91 had adenovirus detected.

Further analysis relates to cases from England, of which adenovirus was detected in 67 of 89 cases which have been tested. Of the 8 England-resident patients who required a liver transplant, 7 were tested for adenovirus in blood samples and the virus was detected in all 7. Adenovirus testing is delivered in hospital trusts through a wide range of commercial and in-house testing arrangements, and current testing algorithms rarely include the testing of whole blood for immunocompetent patients with any presenting syndromes. Ascertainment of adenovirus testing arrangements is incomplete, either because of variation in local testing arrangements, sample types tested, or platforms used, which themselves may vary in detection sensitivity. Typically, the detection of adenovirus uses a highly conserved target, but subtyping into adenovirus species requires further specific PCRs or sequence confirmation.

For cases in England, by sample type based on the data report, adenovirus was detected more commonly in blood or serum samples from cases (51 out of 62, 82.2%), than in stool (44.0%) or respiratory (28.6%) samples. However, a consistent sample set has not been tested for most cases (see Table 2 [for all Figures and Tables, see original URL. - Mod.LL]). We can say that the picture of detection of enteric adenoviruses in blood is not so far accompanied by detection of enteric adenovirus in stool at the same time, but in a handful of cases an enteric adenovirus has been found in blood, with a different adenovirus found in fecal or respiratory materials, indicating a possible mixed infection.

Of the 22 cases where adenovirus was not detected, 6 had not had testing on blood which appears to be the most relevant sample type for the syndrome, 5 were tested on plasma not whole blood, and a further 9 of unknown sample type had been tested in a hospital laboratory but not retested by the reference laboratory, although we are aware of potential performance differences between assays in clinical use. For 20 of the 22 cases where adenovirus is reported as not detected, we therefore cannot definitively exclude the presence of adenovirus. Of the 33 cases with adenovirus in blood, 18 have been successfully subtyped, of which all 18 are type 41F, including 4 out of 6 transplanted cases.

Further investigative work, including WGS of multiple cases, is required before any firm conclusions can be drawn on charaterisation of the adenoviruses involved.

Adenovirus WGS as well as metagenomic sequencing have commenced on case samples. The low levels of adenovirus present in blood are challenging for recovery of high-quality genomes. For blood samples with attempted WGS, cycle threshold values range from 32 to 37.

There are currently very limited whole genome adenovirus sequence data available in the public domain, particularly for enteric adenoviruses. Academic and clinical centres which have or can generate adenovirus WGS data are asked to share consensus genomes to an International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration such as GenBank to assist characterisation of circulating adenovirus strains internationally.

5.3 SARS-CoV-2:
For cases resident in England, 11 cases tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on admission (PCR or lateral flow device), of 97 cases with available test data (11.3%). An additional 3 tested positive in the 8 weeks prior to admission (for a total period prevalence of 14 out of 100, 14%).

Serological testing is in process to explore prior infection further, however, the high population cumulative prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 will make the interpretation of this data challenging. Four cases were co-infected with adenovirus and SARS-CoV-2.

Five cases with a positive test result for SARS-CoV-2 also have associated variant information from WGS. All 5 sequences are classified as VOC-22JAN-01 (lineage BA.2). Four of the 5 sequences contain mutations in addition to those expected to be present in all BA.2 sequences, but the mutations do not occur in more than one sequence. Two of the 6 sequences are from the time of hepatitis presentation, the remaining 4 sequences are from 3, 8, and 15 days post hepatitis presentation.

5.4. Metagenomic sequencing blood and liver analyses:
Metagenomics has been performed on 19 samples: 14 samples from 11 English cases (6 blood, 4 liver, 2 serum and 2 EDTA-Plasma) and 5 Scottish samples from 5 Scottish cases (all sera).

Three testing laboratories have been involved: GOSH, Medical Research Council Centre for Virus Research (MRC-CVR) in Glasgow and UKHSA. UKHSA analysis of this data is in process, and only provisional results are reported here. Updates will be provided.

Adeno-associated virus 2 (AAV2) was detected in both DNA and RNA fractions through metagenomic analysis, in samples from cases in England and Scotland. Provisional metagenomic analysis on English blood and liver samples has been performed by GOSH using methods available online. This has identified 9 samples (8 cases) containing more than 50 reads that have been identified as AAV2. These have been analyzed using the GOSH pipeline: 4 samples (4 cases) contain over 1500 reads mapping to AAV2 reference sequences, with consensus sequences generated. Three of these consensus sequences are from liver tissue samples, the remaining sequence is from a blood sample. A further consensus sequence from a liver sample with more than 450 reads was also generated by GOSH.

AAV2 was detected in metagenomic analysis of serum from a further 5 cases in Scotland. Sequencing and analysis of this data was undertaken by the (MRC-CVR, Glasgow) in collaboration with ISARIC Clinical Characterisation Protocol. Three AAV2 consensus sequences have been provided for this analysis. AAV2 consensus sequences from metagenomic analysis of cases have been aligned and placed in a phylogenetic tree (Figure 5). Consensus sequences generated by GOSH are labelled GOSH 1-5, whilst MRC-CVR consensus sequences are labelled as CVR 1-3.

While there is very little background data, none of the AAV2 consensus sequences generated to date [6 May 2022] are identical, and sequences do not share a recent common ancestor. Consensus genomes will be uploaded to Genbank and accession numbers included in subsequent briefings.

AAV2 is a dependoparvovirus which is typically dependent on other viruses including adenovirus and herpesviruses to replicate. Non-pathogenic human infection is common and latent virus may reactivate in some circumstances, again with no clinical consequence.

The hypotheses which are under consideration to explain detection of AAV2 in metagenomic data are:
1. Upregulation of AAV2 due to adenovirus or another acute viral infection.
2. Upregulation of AAV2 due to liver injury.
3. Contamination (for example of a reagent). Laboratory contamination is now considered less likely given that AAV2 has been detected in 2 testing laboratories with the appropriate negative assay controls but remains a possible explanation.
4. Undetermined role in pathogenesis of the syndrome.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[4] Spain
Date: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: El Comercio [in Spanish, machine trans., edited]
https://www.elcomercio.es/sociedad/salud/espana-contabiliza-casos-hepatitis-infantil-origen-desconocido-alerta-global-20220506141155-nt.html


Spain records 22 cases of childhood hepatitis and the WHO launches a global alert
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Ministry of Health of the Xunta de Galicia has notified this Friday [6 May 2022] 2 new cases of acute childhood hepatitis of unknown origin, which have been detected in the health area of Vigo. One of the patients suffered from the disease in March [2022] while the other remains hospitalized and is progressing favorably, although the Galician administration does not report the age of the patients.

Until now [6 May 2022], 5 cases have been detected in Galicia, of which 2 remain with active disease. The Galician Ministry explains that it is looking out for more possible infections, just as the rest of the communities do, after the Ministry of Health requested that they retroactively search for possible infections that have occurred since January [2022].

According to the latest count from the Ministry of Health, published last Friday [29 Apr 2022], 22 cases of childhood hepatitis of unknown origin have been found in Spain, 16 of them in children under 11 years of age, between [1 Jan and 29 Apr 2022]. The National Microbiology Center analyzed samples from 8 cases and found a type 2 adenovirus in 4 of them. At the moment, scientists point to the possibility that it is an adenovirus, a group of viruses that can infect the respiratory tract, eyes, the digestive system or the liver, which is responsible for the cases. In Spain, 4 of the 8 samples tested positive for adenovirus and in one of them, the National Center for Microbiology, through genomic sequencing, found a type 2 adenovirus.

Childhood hepatitis of unknown origin began as a national alert in the United Kingdom, then jumped to the rest of Europe and has now become a global concern. The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies this health alarm as "a very urgent matter". "We are giving this top priority and working very closely with the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control on management and coordination," WHO Regional Director of Emergencies Gerald Rockenschaub said.

[Byline: Álvaro Soto]

--
Communicated by;
ProMED

******
[5] Panama
Date: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: Tico Times [edited]
https://ticotimes.net/2022/05/06/panama-detects-first-case-of-a-mysterious-hepatitis-affecting-children


Panama detects 1st case of a mysterious hepatitis affecting children
--------------------------------------------------------------------
The Panamanian health authorities have detected the 1st case of a mysterious hepatitis affecting children in Panama, which is of concern to the WHO, which reports at least 230 cases worldwide.

The case is a 2-year-old boy, resident in the eastern part of the province of Panama, who is out of danger after being hospitalized, as stated in a communiqué by the national chief of Epidemiology of the Ministry of Health, Lourdes Moreno.

The detection was carried out by the Gorgas Memorial Institute, a scientific research entity and a reference laboratory in Panama. Moreno explained that "it is hepatitis F40-41, which corresponds precisely to the alert issued by the WHO/PAHO. In view of this case, epidemiological surveillance has been intensified and the surveillance alert has already been sent to all health facilities" in the country, said the official.

In April [2022], PAHO issued an alert due to the appearance of cases of acute and severe hepatitis of unknown origin, in several countries, in minors.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[6] Costa Rica
Date: Wed 4 May 2022
Source: Outbreak News Today [edited]
http://outbreaknewstoday.com/costa-rica-investigates-case-of-severe-hepatitis-in-a-two-year-old-girl-58267/


Costa Rica investigates case of severe hepatitis in a 2-year-old girl
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The Costa Rica Ministry of Health reports they are currently investigating the case of a 2-year-old girl who presented severe hepatitis without liver failure. Currently, the minor shows satisfactory clinical improvement and was discharged after requiring hospitalization. Given this situation, the Health Surveillance Directorate of the Ministry generated the alert for health services and an inter-institutional team was formed that is monitoring the event.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[7] Japan
Dater: Fri 6 May 2022
Source: Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare [in Japanese, machine trans., summ., edited]
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/000936031.pdf


Acute hepatitis of unknown cause in children
---------------------------------------------
Number of reported cases of acute hepatitis of unknown cause in children (report status from October 2021 to 5 May 2022)
Cumulative number = 7
Liver transplant = 0
COVID-19 PCR Positive = 1
Adenovirus PCR = 1 (Adenovirus type 1, partial PCR) 4 cases tested, waiting for results

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[More clinically compatible cases continue to be reported -- it is not entirely clear how many of these are newly presenting or being found looking back at past cases over the past few months but the UKHSA report above suggests new cases are occurring. A timeline of all the cases based on the day of initial symptoms would be very informative.

One possible cause, adenovirus serotype 41, one of the so-called enteric adenoviruses, has not been known previously to cause hepatitis in the immunologically normal host. Whether the finding of adenovirus serotype 41 is an epiphenomenon or the virus is etiologic here is not yet known. In this CDC report related to the Alabama cases (Hepatitis, undefined, global (03): USA (AL) children, CDC, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220430.8702942), which were seemingly recognized prior to European cases, no clear evidence of adenovirus in the affected liver tissue was found, and although type 41 was identified by hexon gene sequencing, it is not clear if a whole genomic analysis of the virus has been compared or even can be compared to older adenovirus serotype 41. Hexon is the major surface coat protein of adenovirus.

If the virus is the cause, has the agent acquired additional virulence factors, or is a cofactor involved (virus or toxin)? Are certain children genetically more susceptible to the more severe disease? Metagenomics available so far from the UK has not reported adenovirus but rather adeno-associated virus-2. It is unclear what this means (as discussed in the text and below). Posts from Spain and Japan seen above also reported adenovirus type 2 and 1 respectively, not 41.

It has been known for more than 50 years that AAVs can be isolated from humans since Blacklow NR, Hoggan MD, Rowe WP: Isolation of adenovirus-associated viruses from man. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1967 Oct;58:1410-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.58.4.1410. The children did develop antibodies against AA as well but it is unclear what role AAV plays, if any, in human disease. The viruses have, however, begun to be used in gene therapy. The following is extracted from Hattie E, Samulski R.J.S.: Adeno-Associated Virus at 50: A Golden Anniversary of Discovery, Research, and Gene Therapy Success--A Personal Perspective. Hum Gene Ther. 2015 May 1; 26(5): 257-265. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4442590/ (citations can be found at the original URL - Mod. LL]:

"With the discovery of "virus-like" particles in adenovirus (Ad) preparation by Bob Atchison (1) and M. David Hoggan and Wallace Rowe (2) in 1965, the journey of a novel parvovirus began (3). Atchison tentatively referred to the virus as adeno-associated virus (AAV), and Rowe continued use of the name. Early experiments characterized a virus that replicated poorly, if at all, in human cells in the absence of Ad. However, it was clear that AAV was immunologically distinct from any known Ad antigen, and 3 serotypes were identified, AAV1, 2, and 3 (1). The following years saw progress in determining that the AAV capsid contained an ssDNA genome (4,5) that the genome contained inverted terminal repeats (ITRs) (6-8), and that these ITRs are structured as self-priming hairpins that act as origins of genome replication (9). Sequencing of the AAV2 serotype ITRs was complete by 1980 (10) Concomitantly, the latent state of AAV was observed at NIH when an Ad infection on a panel of cell lines resulted in the production of AAV. This led to the discovery that low numbers of AAV genomes were integrated into the host chromosome (11) thus establishing the foundation for using AAV as a gene therapy vector based on its lytic (co-infection with Ad), latent (establishment of persistence in the absence), bi-phasic life cycle.

"Also in the early 1980s, with all molecular biology experiments being conducted using AAV serotype 2, it was known that the AAV genome was packaged into preformed capsid proteins (12). Further, a transcription map showed 3 overlapping mRNA families from 3 promoters, p5, p19, and p40 (13,14). The genome appeared divided between left and right, and 3 capsids, VP1, VP2, and VP3, were produced from the p40 promoter on the right side (15). It was unclear what the left half of the genome encoded, but a replication function was predicted. What was known, however, was that the virus could be produced in excess of 100 000 particles per cell. This ability to produce high yields, the fact that AAV was not a pathogen, and that the virus could persist all encouraged further exploration of its use as a gene therapy delivery platform. Unfortunately, because AAV replicated in the presence of a lytic virus, there was no easy focus-forming assay for selection of isolated mutants. Molecular clones were needed, but the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) guidelines were not clear when it came to cloning AAV DNA into plasmids. According to Barrie Carter, a 1980 ASM meeting in Miami Beach convinced the NIH RAC that recombinant DNA viruses like AAV and Ad could be safely studied in BSL2-approved laboratories (16). Here, cloning of the AAV genome into plasmids became a reality and isolation of wild-type (wt) AAV infectious clones became a major milestone for the field."

AAV2 is now approved for gene therapy for several rare genetic diseases in the UK and USA (Keeler AM, Flotte TR: Recombinant Adeno-Associated Virus Gene Therapy in Light of Luxturna (and Zolgensma and Glybera): Where Are We, and How Did We Get Here? Annu Rev Virol. 2019 Sep 29; 6(1): 601-621 doi: 10.1146/annurev-virology-092818-015530). Whether AAV2 is related to these cases of severe pediatric hepatitis seems unlikely but more information is needed.

At this point, no major evidence for household clusters has been reported, which one might expect if a foodborne or environmental toxin or transmissible agent was involved although the UKHSA reports 2 pairs of epidemiologically-linked cases. The link to dog ownership is noted but of unclear importance at this point as it too would likely result in more clustered cases. Additionally, it remains interesting to know if any asymptomatic aminotransferase elevations were looked for in household contacts. The cases recognized as severe could be the "tip of the iceberg," as we saw with paralytic poliomyelitis when only a small percentage of infections resulted in the classical asymmetrical flaccid paralysis of polio. - Mod.LL]
See Also
Hepatitis, undefined, global (06): children, possible adenovirus, 2021-2022 20220505.8703064
Hepatitis, undefined, global (05): children, possible adenovirus, 2021-2022 20220502.8702980
Hepatitis, undefined, global (04): children, poss adenovirus, 2021-2022 20220430.8702947
Hepatitis, undefined, global (03): USA (AL) children, CDC, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220430.8702942
Hepatitis, undefined - global (02): USA, Japan, Cyprus 20220428.8702896
Hepatitis, undefined - global: children, USA, Japan, Canada 20220427.8702884
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (07): children, aflatoxin hypothesis, 2021-22 20220426.8702860
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (06): USA, children, poss adenovirus 2021-22 20220426.8702848
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (05): UKHSA,children, poss adenovirus 2021-22 20220425.8702847
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (04): WHO, children, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220424.8702811
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (03): CDC, children, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220421.8702752
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (02): Israel, children, possible adenovirus, 2021-22 20220420.8702720Tia
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe: children, possible adenovirus, RFI 20220415.8702636
Hepatitis, undefined - UK: children, RFI 20220406.8702449
2021
----
Non-viral hepatitis - USA (02): bottled water, fatal, recall 20210523.8377404
Non-viral hepatitis - USA: (NV) bottled water susp 20210429.8334840
.................................................sb/ll/may/ml
</body>
