<header id=018397>
Published Date: 2011-12-24 09:31:52 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza (78): USA, swine-origin H3N2 reassortants update
Archive Number: 20111224.3669
</header>
<body id=018397>
INFLUENZA (78): UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, SWINE-ORIGIN H3N2
REASSORTANTS UPDATE
********************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: Brandon Sun, The Canadian Press [edited]
http://www.brandonsun.com/lifestyles/breaking-news/us-finds-new-human-infection-with-swine-h3n2-flu-virus-now-called-variant-136160753.html?thx=y


U.S. finds new human infection with swine H3N2 flu; virus now called
‘variant’
-----------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. public health officials have found another case of human
infection with a swine-origin H3N2 virus, this time in a child from
West Virginia. And they also reported finding a human infection with a
new swine influenza virus never before seen in humans, in a person in
Wisconsin who had contact with pigs. The Wisconsin case seems to be a
one-off infection, with no signs of further spread. But the
investigation into the West Virginia case suggests the child was
infected by another person, not a pig and that some amount of
human-to-human spread of the virus took place in the unnamed community
where the child lives, according to details released Friday by the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control [see below - Mod.CP].

The H3N2 case is the 12th – in five states -- reported in the U.S.
since this new virus was first spotted in July. And the CD
acknowledges there are probably more cases that haven’t been picked
up by the country’s flu surveillance systems. "We don’t think
these are all" the cases, said Dr. Joe Bresee, head of the influenza
epidemiology team in the CDC's Influenza division. To date no other
country has reported seeing human infections with this virus, which
has also been isolated from pigs in the U.S.

Details of the investigations into the West Virginia case -- the
second in that state -- and one spotted in the fall in Indiana were
released late Friday [23 Dec 2011]. The Indiana case was in a man who
worked with pigs. A separate release revealed details of the Wisconsin
case, which involved a new H1N1 virus with genes from avian, swine and
human flu viruses. The case accounts were contained in a report that
revealed that international influenza science partners have agreed to
a new name for these viruses, one that drops the constant reference to
the viruses’ swine origin. The agricultural sector objected loudly
in the early days of the 2009 pandemic when human health officials
referred to the new virus as a swine influenza virus. Pork sales
plummeted and the industry has been worried the same could happen
again with new reports of human infections with swine flu viruses. The
World Health Organization and the UN’s Food and Agriculture
Organization have agreed to call these viruses "H3N2 variants" or
H3N2v for short. The new H1N1 virus -- which has been circulating in
pigs since last year -- will be similarly called H1N1v.

The H3N2v viruses are hybrids of a swine influenza virus that has been
circulating for more than a decade in pigs. That virus has acquired an
internal gene -- the M gene -- from the H1N1 virus that caused the
2009 pandemic. Studies have shown that gene appears to make viruses
that contain it more transmissible among guinea pigs, a model that is
used to predict how flu behaves in humans. The virus from the H1N1v
case in Wisconsin also contains the M gene from the 2009 pandemic
virus.

Cases of human infection with the variant H3N2 virus have been seen in
Indiana, Pennsylvania, Iowa, Maine and West Virginia. Most have been
in children younger than 10 and none of the cases has died. Six of the
12 had exposure to pigs but in the other six, no contact with swine
could be found. The CDC has said it believes some of these cases are
the result of human-to-human spread, but suggests spread among people
is probably still limited at this point.
"It’s not clear yet that these viruses have acquired the ability to
circulate in humans in a sustained way. We certainly haven’t seen
that in the outbreaks that we’ve investigated" Bresee said. But the
report on the case in West Virginia suggests there may have been quite
a few more cases there. And surveillance in the area and the adjacent
communities of Maryland has been ramped up.

The latest case was a child under five years of age who attended the
same daycare as West Virginia’s earlier case of H3N2v infection. But
there were more than 10 days between the onset of the first case and
the onset of the second, which suggests the first child was not the
source of the second child’s infection. Furthermore, multiple
contacts of the two children -- including other children in the
daycare -- were reported to have had respiratory illnesses in the
period when the cases occurred, though most were not tested for flu.

This H3N2v virus is a distant cousin of the virus by the same name
that circulates among humans. Testing conducted at the CDC suggests
the virus is most closely related to human H3N2 viruses that
circulated in the early 1990s, which suggests many people over age 20
may have some antibodies that would respond to the variant virus.

Flu experts are watching the situation with concern, though not alarm
at this point. What path the virus will take remains unclear: it could
peter out, continue to circulate at low levels, mainly in young
children, or spread more broadly. Most experts don’t believe it
could cause a pandemic, given the amount of immunity the human
population has to human H3N2 viruses. But they worry it might be able
to seed itself in humans enough to continue to spread, potentially
creating a situation where there might be three families of
circulating influenza A viruses: the H1N1s, the human H3N2s and these
variant H3N2s.,If it appeared the viruses were causing enough disease
to warrant including them in the annual flu strain "that will be a
mess," said Adolfo Garcia-Sastre, an influenza researcher at New
York’s Mount Sinai Hospital. "If they jump into humans, I don’t
think it will be a big public health nightmare," Garcia-Sastre said.
"But I think what it could do is it may be able to establish a second
lineage of H3s. And that will make it very difficult to handle, from
the point of view of the vaccine."

[Byline: Helen Branswell]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>


******
[2]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: MMWR Weekly 2011 / 60 (Early Release);1-4 [abridged & edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm60e1223a1.htm?s_cid=mm60e1223a1_w

Update: Influenza A (H3N2)v Transmission and Guidelines -- Five
States, 2011
------------------------------------------------------------------
>From 17 Aug to 23 Dec 2011, 2011, CDC received reports of 12 human
infections with influenza A (H3N2)v viruses that have the matrix (M)
gene from the influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 virus (formerly called
swine-origin influenza A [H3N2] and pandemic influenza A [H1N1] 2009
viruses, respectively). [See the note on nomenclature change
reproduced in the Moderator's comment below]. The 12 cases occurred in
five states (Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia),
and 11 were in children (1,2). Six of the 12 patients had no
identified recent exposure to swine. Three of the 12 patients were
hospitalized, and all have recovered fully.

A case in an adult male in Indiana with occupational exposure to swine
was among the 12, and two children in West Virginia who regularly
attended the same day care accounted for the latest cases. This report
describes those cases and swine influenza virus (SIV) surveillance
being conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).

Case Reports
-----------
Indiana
------
On 28 Oct 2011, CDC was notified by the Indiana Department of Health
of a suspected case of A(H3N2)v virus infection in an adult male. The
patient experienced onset of fever, cough, shortness of breath,
nausea, vomiting, and body aches on October 20, and was hospitalized
for 4 days. He did not receive treatment with influenza antiviral
medications and recovered fully.

On October 22, a respiratory specimen from the patient was positive
for influenza at the hospital. On October 28, the virus was identified
by real-time, reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction
(rRT-PCR) testing at the Indiana State Public Health Laboratory as an
inconclusive influenza A virus, consistent with results seen with
other recent A(H3N2)v infections. On October 31, genome sequencing at
CDC confirmed the virus as A(H3N2)v with the M gene from the
A(H1N1)pdm09 virus, similar to the viruses identified in the other
cases of human infection in the United States since August 2011.

The patient reported direct contact with swine during his work in the
week before illness onset. He said he did not wear any personal
protective equipment (PPE) because the swine did not exhibit signs of
illness. No illness was reported among the patient's household members
or other close contacts.

West Virginia
--------
On November 19, a child aged <5 years developed acute onset of fever
after 1 week of cough and congestion. The child had been hospitalized
for an unrelated condition 2 days before the onset of fever. On
November 21, a respiratory specimen was collected. Rapid diagnostic
tests conducted by the hospital were negative for influenza and
respiratory syncytial virus, but influenza A was identified by an
alternative rRT-PCR at the hospital. The specimen was forwarded to the
West Virginia Office of Laboratory Services, where it was identified
as a suspected influenza A (H3N2)v virus. Subsequent genome sequencing
conducted at CDC confirmed the virus as A(H3N2)v with the M gene from
the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus. The child, who had no recent travel or
exposure to swine, was discharged on November 21, and has since
recovered from the influenza illness.

An investigation was conducted to ascertain respiratory illnesses
among contacts of the child that occurred during November 9–December
19. Multiple contacts, including children who regularly attended day
care with the child, were found to have had respiratory illness during
this period. On November 29, a second child aged <5 years who attended
day care regularly with the first child and who had no recent travel
or swine exposure became ill with fever, cough, diarrhea, and
rhinorrhea. The second child did not seek medical care and recovered
fully from the illness. A respiratory specimen obtained from the
second child on December 7 was inconclusive by rRT-PCR at the West
Virginia Office of Laboratory Services; however, the specimen was
confirmed as influenza A (H3N2)v with the M gene from the A(H1N1)pdm09
virus via genome sequencing at CDC.

No additional A(H3N2)v cases have been identified among the other ill
day care attendees or contacts of either patient. Enhanced
surveillance for influenza-like illness and increased diagnostic
testing of respiratory specimens is being conducted in West Virginia
and adjacent counties in Maryland as part of the ongoing investigation
of these cases. Currently, no evidence of additional human-to-human
transmission in the community has been identified.

Influenza Surveillance of U.S. Swine
-----------------------------
Surveillance for SIV in the United States is overseen by USDA, largely
in swine that display influenza-like illness. In July 2009, USDA's
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service and the swine industry
implemented a SIV surveillance program to characterize the
distribution of SIV in U.S. swine herds. To date, approximately 150
SIV isolates have undergone sequencing of three genes (hemagglutinin,
matrix, and neuraminidase gene segments) and sequences have been
submitted to GenBank. Thirty isolates have been identified as A(H3N2)
viruses and eight of those 30 have the M gene from the influenza A
(H1N1)pdm09 virus as determined by an informal analysis of GenBank
submission data by the USDA Agricultural Research Service. Further
characterization and analysis are ongoing, and new submissions are
added as diagnostic work is completed.

MMWR Editorial Note
-----------------
Human infections with the influenza viruses currently circulating
among swine are rare. Since 2005, only 35 cases have been reported in
the United States, but the frequency with which they have been
detected increased in 2011. When different influenza viruses
simultaneously infect a single host (e.g., a human or swine), exchange
of genetic material can occur, resulting in a new influenza virus.
Depending on the antigenic distance between the new virus and recently
circulating seasonal viruses, little or no immunity might exist in the
human population. Influenza A (H3N2)v viruses resulted from
reassortment of influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 viruses with swine influenza A
(H3N2) viruses. A diagram depicting this reassortment is available
online from CDC's Public Health Image Library [Available at:
http://phil.cdc.gov/phil/details.asp (image ID: 13469]. Because these
viruses carry a newly identified combination of genes, little
information is available regarding transmission efficiency in swine,
in humans, or between swine and humans. However, the recent human
cases involving swine exposure and results of SIV surveillance
indicate that these viruses also currently are circulating in swine
herds.

The case of influenza A (H3N2)v infection after occupational contact
with swine in Indiana and the apparent limited human-to-human
transmission of A(H3N2)v virus that occurred in a day care setting in
West Virginia represent two different possible scenarios for
transmission of this virus. Work exposure highlights the risk for
interspecies influenza transmission in occupational settings where
humans are exposed to swine, an association that has been described
previously (3–7). To minimize the risk for interspecies influenza
transmission in occupational settings, CDC and the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) encourage swine workers to 1) get
vaccinated against human seasonal influenza, 2) wear appropriate PPE,
and 3) practice good hygiene, such as washing hands thoroughly with
soap and water, when in contact with swine, especially swine that show
signs of illness. The National Pork Board also recommends producers
work with their veterinarian to develop appropriate prevention and
control measures for influenza in swine, which can include vaccinating
swine against swine influenza. Similar to humans, swine infected with
influenza viruses do not always exhibit signs of infection (8).
Persons with swine exposure in the week before onset of an illness
with symptoms of influenza requiring medical care should notify their
health-care provider of their swine exposures. Persons who develop
symptoms of influenza after close contact with swine are recommended
to stay home until well to minimize contact with persons and swine as
much as possible.

The A(H3N2)v cases in West Virginia involved two children who attended
the same day care, but the first child was unlikely to have
transmitted the virus to the second child, given the ≥10-day
difference in their symptom onset dates. This represents a scenario of
limited human-to-human transmission occurring in a day care setting.
Therefore, clinicians also should consider the possibility of
influenza A (H3N2)v infections in patients who have not had exposure
to swine, particularly young children in those states where influenza
A (H3N2)v cases have been reported. Clinicians who suspect variant
influenza virus infection should obtain a nasopharyngeal swab, place
the swab in viral transport medium, and contact their state or local
health department to facilitate transport and timely diagnosis (10).
Influenza A (H3N2)v viruses detected to date are susceptible to
oseltamivir and zanamivir for the treatment of influenza. Clinicians
who suspect variant influenza infection in a patient should consider
treatment with these medications if clinically indicated (10). Because
these viruses have the M gene from the influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 virus,
they are resistant to amantadine and rimantadine.

CDC is working with USDA and state public health and animal health
experts in the locations where these cases have occurred to
investigate each case fully and to enhance influenza surveillance to
detect human cases of variant influenza virus infections. The CDC
rRT-PCR assay that was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in
September 2011 is able to identify these cases as presumptive
influenza A (H3N2)v cases. These diagnostic test kits have been
distributed to public health laboratories in the United States and
National Influenza Centers designated by the World Health Organization
in other countries. Additional rRT-PCR test enhancements to further
improve detection of influenza A (H3N2)v viruses are under
development.

Limited serologic studies conducted to date indicate that young
children have little preexisting immunity to influenza A (H3N2)v
viruses. Because the hemagglutinin genes of these viruses are related
to human influenza A (H3N2) viruses that circulated in the 1990s,
older children and adults might have limited immunity against these
viruses. Certain persons, including young children, pregnant women,
persons with chronic health conditions such as asthma, diabetes, or
heart and lung disease, and persons aged ≥65 years, are likely to be
at greater risk for serious influenza-related complications from
variant influenza viruses such as influenza A (H3N2)v. The influenza A
(H3N2)v virus is different enough from current human seasonal
influenza viruses that the seasonal influenza vaccine is not expected
to provide significant protection.

[The references cited in this report can be accessed at the source
URL. - Mod.CP]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>


[[Future ProMED-mail reports will wherever possible conform to the new
nomenclature described below for the swine-origin influenza A (H3N2)
and pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 viruses. - Mod.CP]

"After discussions among the World Health Organization (WHO), the
World Organization for Animal Health, the Food and Agriculture
Organization, CDC, and other U.S. federal agencies, swine-origin
influenza viruses identified in humans will now be referred to as
"variant" viruses and denoted with a "v." Influenza viruses identified
in swine populations will continue to be referred to as "swine
influenza" viruses.

This change in nomenclature follows announcement by WHO of a decision
to standardize nomenclature for the pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009
virus (which has had diverse names) as influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 [World
Health Organization. Standardization of terminology of the pandemic
A(H1N1) 2009 virus. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 2011;86:480.]

Since August 2011, CDC has identified 12 human infections in five
states with swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) viruses. Per the new
naming convention, these H3N2 viruses will now be referred to as
"influenza A (H3N2) variant viruses with genes from avian, swine and
human viruses," and will be abbreviated as "A(H3N2)v" for scientific
use and "H3N2v" for general public use. These 12 A(H3N2)v viruses also
have the M gene from the A(H1N1)pdm09 virus."



A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1hiS]
See Also
Influenza (77): WHO update 20111216.3614
Influenza (76): USA, two novel influenza A viruses 20111210.3563
Influenza (75): USA update 20111208.3553
Influenza (74): swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, vaccine candidate 20111203.3526
Influenza (73): WHO update 20111202.3519
Influenza (72): Europe, swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, risk
assessment 20111130.3494
Influenza (71): USA (IA) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, WHO 20111125.3448
Influenza (70): USA (IA) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant 20111124.3438
Influenza (69): USA (IA) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant 20111123.3430
Influenza (68): Hong Kong swine-origin H3N2 reassortant 20111119.3411
Influenza (67): WHO update 20111118.3403
Influenza (66): USA swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, update 20111105.3298
Influenza (64): WHO update 20111104.3289
Influenza (63): USA (ME, NOT NH) corr. 20111106.3307
Influenza (63): USA (ME, NOT NH) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant 20111102.3260
Influenza (61): WHO update 20111021.3140
Influenza (60): USA (ME) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant 20111021.3134
Influenza (58): WHO update 20111007.3019
.................................................cp/lm
</body>
