<header id=052723>
Published Date: 2018-02-13 15:23:42 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hantavirus - Americas (11): USA, Canada
Archive Number: 20180213.5625804
</header>
<body id=052723>
HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (11): USA, CANADA
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 2 Feb 2017
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018; 67(4); 131-134 [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6704a5.htm


ref: Kerins JL, Koske SE, Kazmierczak J, et al. Outbreak of Seoul virus among rats and rat owners -- United States and Canada, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018; 67: 131-134. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6704a5
----------------------------------------------------------------------
In December 2016, the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (WDHS) notified CDC of a patient hospitalized with fever, leukopenia, elevated transaminases, and proteinuria. The patient owned and operated an in-home rattery, or rat-breeding facility, with approximately 100 Norway rats [_Rattus norvegicus_], primarily bred as pets. A family member developed similar symptoms 4 weeks later, but was not hospitalized. Because both patients were known to have rodent contact, they were tested for hantavirus infections. In January 2017, CDC confirmed recent, acute Seoul virus infection in both patients. An investigation was conducted to identify additional human and rat infections and prevent further transmission. Ultimately, the investigation identified 31 facilities in 11 states with human and/or rat Seoul virus infections; 6 facilities also reported exchanging rats with Canadian ratteries. Testing of serum samples from 183 persons in the United States and Canada identified 24 (13.1 percent) with Seoul virus antibodies; 3 (12.5 percent) were hospitalized and no deaths occurred. This investigation, including cases described in a previously published report from Tennessee (1), identified the 1st known transmission of Seoul virus from pet rats to humans in the United States and Canada. Pet rat owners should practice safe rodent handling to prevent Seoul virus infection (2).

Seoul virus is an Old World hantavirus in the Bunyaviridae family. Its natural reservoir is the Norway rat (_R. norvegicus_). Rats infected with Seoul virus are asymptomatic, but can transmit the virus to humans through infectious saliva, urine, droppings, or aerosolization from contaminated bedding. Human signs and symptoms range from mild influenza-like illness to hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). HFRS causes acute renal failure and can result in death; however, asymptomatic Seoul virus infections also occur. Wild Norway rats in the United States have been known to harbor Seoul virus infection (3), but transmission to humans is rare (4). Seoul virus is not known to spread from person to person. In the United Kingdom, Seoul virus transmission has occurred from pet rats to humans (5), but before this outbreak, infections had not been reported in pet rats in the United States or Canada.

Investigation and results
-------------------------
After confirming Seoul virus infection in the Wisconsin patients, CDC and WDHS initiated investigations into rat shipments to (trace-back) and from (trace-forward) the rattery to identify suspected and confirmed facilities. Trace-back investigations initially extended back 2 months prior to onset of clinical disease, based on the known maximum incubation period for Seoul virus in humans. As additional confirmed facilities were identified, tracing focused instead on interactions with known infected facilities, sometimes as much as 1 year prior. Suspected facilities included ratteries, homes, or pet stores that sold rats to a confirmed facility (a facility where at least one human or rat tested positive for Seoul virus infection) or housed rats that lived at or comingled with rats from a confirmed facility. Once a suspected facility was identified, local or state health officials interviewed persons with a history of rodent contact associated with the facility about their rat exposure and health history. Additionally, the primary rodent caretaker was interviewed using a standardized questionnaire to identify movement of rats into and out of the facility, including dates and locations where the rats were obtained. Local or state health officials offered laboratory testing for Seoul virus infection to all persons with rodent contact. Officials recommended testing for persons with a history of febrile illness and exposure to rats from a confirmed facility and for rats at suspected and confirmed facilities. Trace-forward and trace-back investigations of rat shipments at confirmed facilities identified additional suspected facilities, which were similarly assessed.

A suspected human case of Seoul virus infection was defined as a febrile illness (recorded temperature 101 deg F [38.3 deg C] or higher or subjective history of fever) or an illness clinically compatible with Seoul virus infection (myalgia, headache, renal failure, conjunctival redness, thrombocytopenia, or proteinuria) without laboratory confirmation in a person reporting contact with rats from a confirmed or suspected facility. Human Seoul virus infections were laboratory-confirmed by detection of Seoul virus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and/or immunoglobulin G (IgG) (6) antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In the United States, Seoul virus infections in rats were confirmed through detection of viral RNA by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or IgG ELISA at CDC, or by CDC-validated commercial IgG testing. In Canada, public health officials investigated rat breeding facilities that exported rats to and imported rats from affected US facilities. Seoul virus infection was detected in Canadian rats from breeding facilities using the same serologic and molecular-based protocols described for United States facilities.

By 16 Mar 2017, trace-forward and trace-back investigations identified approximately 100 suspected facilities in 21 states. Among these, 31 facilities in 11 states* had laboratory-confirmed human or rat infections, including a previously reported household in Tennessee with 2 confirmed human infections (1); 6 confirmed facilities in 6 states (Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Utah) reported exchanging rats with Canadian ratteries during their trace-forward and trace-back investigations. A total of 163 persons in the United States and 20 in Canada consented to serologic testing; 17 (10.4 percent) US residents and one (5.0 percent) Canadian resident had detectable IgM and IgG antibodies, indicating recent infection, and 4 (2.5 percent) US residents and 2 (10.0 percent) Canadian residents had only IgG antibodies, indicating past or convalescent infection. Among the 17 US patients with recent Seoul virus infection, 8 reported recent febrile illness; 3 were hospitalized, but did not develop HFRS, and all recovered. Serious illness was not reported in any Canadian patients. All strains detected in Canada and the United States were indistinguishable from one another based on nucleotide sequencing (7), indicating that a single strain was responsible for the outbreak. No single facility was identified as the origin of the outbreak.
* Colorado, Georgia, Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Missouri, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and Wisconsin

Public health response
----------------------
On 24 Jan [2017], CDC issued a Health Alert Notice to notify health departments and health care providers of the Seoul virus investigations [https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00400.asp] On 20 Feb [2017], the World Health Organization was notified of the US and Canadian infections and investigations as required by International Health Regulations [http://www.who.int/csr/don/20-february-2017-seoulvirus-usa-and-canada/en/]. On 31 Jan and 9 May 2017, CDC and the Pet Industry Joint Advisory Council hosted calls to provide updates on the Seoul virus outbreak and to answer questions for the pet industry and fancy rat community. CDC created a website with Seoul virus facts and frequently asked questions for the public.

Health departments notified suspected and confirmed facilities and placed those facilities under quarantine, allowing no rats to enter or leave. Rat contact was limited to as few persons as possible to reduce transmission. In suspected facilities, CDC recommended rat testing be performed under the supervision of a public health official or licensed veterinarian. The quarantine was lifted when at least 4 weeks had elapsed since the newest animal was introduced, and all rats subsequently tested negative. Rats belonging to owners who refused to test their animals could remain quarantined for life or be euthanized. CDC recommended euthanasia of all rats in confirmed facilities as the most effective method to prevent transmission, although control recommendations differed by state and country according to local policies and response capacities. If euthanasia was not possible, then owners could either quarantine all rats for life or pursue quarantine with testing and culling. The testing and culling strategy entailed testing all rats and euthanizing only infected rats. Testing and euthanasia were repeated at 4 week intervals until all rats tested negative and the quarantine was lifted. In Canada, public health officials opted for education and a voluntary testing and culling approach to control Seoul virus transmission.

Discussion
----------
This outbreak report, in parallel to the previously described investigation in Tennessee (1), describes the 1st known cases of Seoul virus infection in humans attributable to contact with pet rats in the United States and Canada. Human hantavirus infections are nationally notifiable in the United States and suspected cases should be reported to state or local health departments. Health care providers should consider Seoul virus infection in patients with febrile illness who report rat exposure; CDC recommends testing for any person with compatible illness and rodent contact. Testing is available at CDC [https://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/health-care-workers/specimen-submission/index.html] and through some state and commercial laboratories. In Canada, testing is available for symptomatic persons with rat exposure, rattery owners associated with this investigation, and their rats through public health laboratories; for individually owned pet rats and ratteries not associated with the investigation, testing is available through a commercial laboratory.

Pet rat owners should be aware of the potential for Seoul virus infection. To keep themselves and their pets healthy, all persons with rodent contact should avoid bites or scratches and practice good hand hygiene, especially children and persons with compromised immune systems (2). CDC recommends hand washing after caring for rodents and before eating, drinking, or preparing food (2). If a pet rat is suspected of having Seoul virus, the person cleaning the rodent environment should wear a respirator, gloves, and cover any scratches or open wounds (8). An adult should routinely disinfect rat cages and accessories, including used bedding, with a 10 percent bleach solution or a commercial disinfectant (8). More information about rodent contact and disease prevention is available from CDC (8,9).

Rattery owners are encouraged to quarantine any newly acquired rats for 4 weeks and to test these rats for Seoul virus antibodies before allowing them to comingle with other rats. Commercial laboratories can perform Seoul virus testing of rodent blood samples, and comparisons of results from shared samples have been concordant with CDC's ELISA and RT-PCR assays. To prevent transmission to humans, CDC recommends euthanasia of all rats in facilities with human or rat Seoul virus infections. Further guidance on methods to eradicate Seoul virus from infected ratteries should be obtained from local or state health departments.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The report with references is available at the source URL above.

This report provides a good illustration of the national and international movement of pet rats and, occasionally, movement of a pathogenic virus with them, despite these animals appearing normal. Because domesticated Norway rats are pets in homes and schools, owners need to be aware of the risk, albeit small, that these pets may be inapparent Seoul virus carriers.

In a 2014 ProMED-mail post, Dr Jan Clement provided a good overview of Seoul virus around the world (see ProMED-mail archive no. 20141028.2907225). Most reports are of Seoul virus in wild rats. However, the virus has also been isolated from laboratory and pet rats. The Clement overview reported, "subsequent isolation of Cherwell virus, resulting in a neat 'British' clade of SEOV viruses, grouping together Humber, Cherwell, and IR461 (Jameson LJ, Taori SK, Atkinson B, et al. Pet rats as a source of hantavirus in England and Wales, 2013. Euro Surveill. 2013; 18(9): pii=20415; http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20415)... The IR461 had been obtained already in the late 1970s, and had been isolated from SEOV-infected rats imported from Belgium, and having caused a SEOV laboratory outbreak in PHE, Porton Down (Lloyd G, Jones N. Infection of laboratory workers with hantavirus acquired from immunocytomas propagated in laboratory rats. J Infect. 1986; 12(2): 117-25; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2871112). After a long shelf life, IR461 was finally genetically characterized in 2003, that is, at least 24 years after its 1st isolation in 1979 in PHE. IR461 was confirmed as being SEOV, but against all expectations, appeared not related to any known SEOV derived from laboratory rats. The conclusion was that IR461 resulted most likely from an introduction, in Belgium or elsewhere in Eurasia, of a wild rat strain into a colony of laboratory rats (Shi X, McCaughey C, Elliott RM: Genetic characterisation of a hantavirus isolated from a laboratory-acquired Infection. J Med Virol. 2003; 71(1): 105-9; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmv.10446)."

An earlier report of Seoul virus in pet rats Sweden imported from England in 2011 was reported in 2013. The pet rat diagnosed with SEOV was a male which had been imported to Sweden for breeding purposes in 2011 and had a proven pedigree. It had come from England together with 19 other pet rats.

A report of these current cases, sent in by Dr Charles Calisher, provided some additional information, "People who become infected with the Seoul virus can develop fever, severe headaches, back and abdominal pain, chills, blurred vision, red eyes, or a rash, the CDC said. But some people infected with the virus don't show any symptoms. All 8 people infected in the current outbreak [in Illinois and Wisconsin] have recovered, and 5 out of the 6 people in Illinois who tested positive for the virus did not show symptoms, the IDPH [Illinois Department of Public Health] said. Rats infected with the virus do not typically show symptoms." (http://www.livescience.com/57576-pet-rats-seoul-virus-infections.html).

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Illinois and Wisconsin in the Upper Midwest USA can be accessed at https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5625804,216. - Mod.TY]
See Also
2017
----
Hantavirus - Americas (07): USA (IL,WI) Seoul virus, comment 20170123.4784492
Hantavirus - Americas (05): USA (IL,WI) Seoul virus 20170122.4782661
2014
----
Hantavirus update - Americas (42): USA (NY) Seoul virus, rat reservoir, comment 20141028.2907225
Hantavirus update - Americas (41): USA (NYC) Seoul virus, rat reservoir 20141017.2872156
2013
----
Hantavirus update - Americas (39): comment 20131023.2017083
Seoul virus - Sweden: pet rat, 1st detection 20130705.1809509
.................................................lm/ty/mj/lm
</body>
