<header id=043415>
Published Date: 2022-10-22 22:23:25 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Tuberculosis & brucellosis - Venezuela: (BA) cattle
Archive Number: 20221023.8706318
</header>
<body id=043415>
TUBERCULOSIS & BRUCELLOSIS - VENEZUELA: (BARINAS) CATTLE
*********************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 21 Oct 2022
Source: El Pitazo [in Spanish, machine trans., edited]
https://elpitazo.net/los-llanos/colegio-de-veterinarios-informa-sobre-casos-positivos-de-tuberculosis-bovina-en-barinas/


Veterinary College reports positive cases of bovine tuberculosis in Barinas
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Barinas Veterinary College has put out a warning about the presence of positive cases of bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis in municipal and industrial slaughterhouses in Barinas.

The union indicates it does not handle figures, but assures it has learned of the outbreak of brucellosis and bovine tuberculosis through unofficial sources, workers in slaughterhouses and cold storage facilities, and through some records kept by the union members who participate in the national vaccination campaign for the eradication of foot-and-mouth disease, whose 2nd phase began last weekend and ends on 15 Dec 2022.

The president of the college, Carlip Rojas, points out in a note sent to El Pitazo, that he personally knows of slaughterhouses where veterinarians have shown him images of tuberculosis cases. He calls for the Sanitary Comptroller and the National Institute of Agricultural and Integral Security (Insai) to face this matter of public health. "These are diseases of mandatory reporting and as such the ranchers must report them", he stressed.

Bovine tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic bacterial disease of animals, caused by the _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ complex, which occasionally affects other mammalian species, reports the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH).

Brucellosis is controlled through vaccination campaigns against foot-and-mouth disease, but tuberculosis has been neglected and is a disease that has increased in recent months, Rojas emphasized. [There are vaccination campaigns against food-and-mouth disease, so brucellosis vaccination may be administered at the same time. - Mod.TG]

The union leader indicates the College of Veterinarians is ready to collaborate in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases transmitted from animals to humans (zoonoses). "It is not only taking care of the animal population, but also the human population", he expresses.

Rojas details the union and the state are working together to implement tests and diagnose animals positive for tuberculosis. This is because bovine tuberculosis has been diagnosed in different municipal and industrial slaughterhouses from different states of the country.

We are proposing Barinas follow the example of Zulia state, where most municipalities require a tuberculosis test to move animals, said the veterinarian. "Unfortunately, in many states the bovine tuberculosis test is not required, but in the coming days Barinas will require it for its herds, because the reappearance of the disease is worrying."

[Byline: Bianile Rivas]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED Rapporteur Mahmoud Orabi

[Barinas is a city in west central Venezuela. According to the 2011 census, its population is 353 442. It is the capital of the Barinas Municipality and the State of Barinas. The city of Barinas is known as the capital of the Llanos, a vast tropical grassland plain east of the Andes (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barinas,_Barinas).

Tuberculosis (TB) is considered a reemerging, infectious granulomatous disease in animals and people caused by acid-fast bacilli in the _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ complex. Although commonly defined as a chronic, debilitating disease, TB occasionally assumes an acute, rapidly progressive course. The disease affects practically all species of vertebrates. The widespread occurrence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains of _M. tuberculosis_ is of concern to clinicians and public health and regulatory officials involved in the control of disease. Bovine TB is still a significant zoonosis in nonindustrialized countries of the world. Signs and lesions are generally similar in the various species.

Bovine tuberculosis is an important infectious disease worldwide that threatens the lives and livelihood of those people associated with the cattle industry. Many countries, including the United States, are trying to identify and prevent the spread of this disease through testing and eradication programs. Bovine tuberculosis is a zoonotic disease that causes respiratory disease in both cattle and humans. The organism can be transmitted to humans through infected unpasteurized milk or the inhalation of bacteria at the time of slaughter.

Bovine tuberculosis is spread through aerosolized droplets or ingestion once it is established in a herd of cattle. The incubation period can range from months to years with the severity depending on the immune system of each individual animal. Infection results in chronic disease; animals typically present with clinical signs during times of increased stress or as they age. The organs that can be affected include the lungs, liver, spleen, lymph nodes and intestines. The clinical signs include moist cough, dyspnea, weight loss, anorexia, lymphadenopathy and diarrhea.

_Mycobacterium bovis_ is the organism that causes bovine tuberculosis. The bacteria are acid fast, filamentous, curved rods. The bacteria usually enter the respiratory system of a cow and settle in the lungs. Macrophages in lungs are then responsible for phagocytizing the organism.

The organism replicates intracellularly after it has been taken up by the macrophages. A granuloma or tubercle forms as the body tries to wall off the infected macrophages with fibrous tissue. The granuloma is usually 1-3 cm in diameter, yellow or gray, round and firm. On cut section, the core of the granuloma consists of dry yellow, caseous, or necrotic cellular debris. The infection can spread hematogenously to lymph nodes and other areas of the body and cause smaller, 2-3 mm in diameter, tubercles. The formation of these smaller tubercles is known as "miliary tuberculosis". The histological lesions consist of necrotic cells in the center of the tubercle surrounded by epitheloid cells and multinucleated giant cells all encapsulated by collagenous connective tissue. The necrotic core of cells can often become calcified as the tubercle matures.

Diagnosis of bovine tuberculosis can be accomplished through gross examination, histology, acid-fast staining, culturing the bacteria, and PCR. In the live animal, interferon gamma testing, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing, and tuberculin testing can be performed. The interferon gamma test is a whole blood immunoassay that detects the presence of the cytokine produced by natural killer cells in response to mycobacterial protein. However, the most common test used in the United States is the tuberculin skin test.

Tuberculin skin testing is based on T-cell response to mycobacterial proteins. The caudal-fold tuberculin test is performed using 0.10 cc of a purified protein derivative. This is injected intradermally in the skin of the tail. The injection site should be examined for a reaction 72 hours post inoculation. If there is a reaction, such as a discolored raised area, the animal is classified as a responder and undergoes a comparative cervical tuberculin test. The test is more sensitive and helps to determine whether the animal is infected with _M. bovis_ as opposed to _M. avium_ or _M. paratuberculosis_. This test is performed by injecting 0.10 cc of a more potent purified protein derivative intradermally into the cervical skin. If the animal responds to this injection, it is classified as a reactor; the animal will be euthanized and a necropsy should be performed to determine the extent of the infection.

Currently, treatment of bovine tuberculosis is not recommended due to its infectious nature. If an animal is found to be infected, it should be culled from the herd.

Vaccination for the prevention of bovine tuberculosis is another option being investigated. A vaccine was created for _M. bovis_ in the 1920s by Calmette and Guerin. The BCG vaccine has undergone some scrutiny due to variable efficacy. The vaccine reduces the severity of the disease, usually allowing the bacteria to infect only a few lymph nodes, but does not prevent infection. The vaccine can also cause false-positive caudal fold skin tests, which can cause confusion when testing is performed. There are studies researching the efficacy of combining the BCG vaccine with mycobacterium protein and DNA. The goal is to develop an enhanced vaccine which can provide protection against the disease. The vaccine would be given to wildlife in an effort to prevent the spread of the disease to cattle.

Bovine tuberculosis poses a significant risk to human and herd health. The only way to be protected from the disease is through prevention. It is important to limit the exposure of the herd to other infected cattle or wildlife. Testing and eradication of infected animals is the current method of control, though additional research is currently being explored in the areas of vaccinations and other possible preventative measures. (Extracted from: https://www.addl.purdue.edu/newsletters/2006/Fall/BovineTB.htm)

Brucellosis:
The disease in cattle, water buffalo, and bison is caused almost exclusively by _Brucella abortus_; however, _B suis_ occasionally is isolated from seropositive cows but does not appear to cause clinical signs and is not contagious from cow to cow. In some countries, the disease in cattle is caused by _B melitensis_. The syndrome is similar to that caused by _B abortus_. _B melitensis_ is not present in the USA.

Infection spreads rapidly and causes many abortions in unvaccinated cattle. In a herd in which disease is endemic, an infected cow typically aborts only once after exposure; subsequent gestations and lactations appear normal. After exposure, cattle become bacteremic for a short period and develop agglutinins and other antibodies; some cattle resist infection, and a small percentage of infected cows spontaneously recover. A positive serum agglutination test usually precedes an abortion or a normal parturition but may be delayed in ~15% of cows. The incubation period may be variable and is inversely related to stage of gestation at time of exposure. Organisms are shed in milk and uterine discharges, and the cow may become temporarily infertile. Bacteria may be found in the uterus during pregnancy, uterine involution, and infrequently, for a prolonged time in the nongravid uterus. Shedding from the vagina largely disappears with the cessation of fluids after parturition. Some infected cows that previously aborted shed brucellae from the uterus at subsequent normal parturitions. Organisms are shed in milk for a variable length of time -- in most cattle for life. _B abortus_ can frequently be isolated from secretions of nonlactating udders.

Natural transmission occurs by ingestion of organisms, which are present in large numbers in aborted fetuses, fetal membranes, and uterine discharges. Cattle may ingest contaminated feed and water or may lick contaminated genitals of other animals. Venereal transmission by infected bulls to susceptible cows appears to be rare. Transmission may occur by artificial insemination when _Brucella_-contaminated semen is deposited in the uterus but, reportedly, not when deposited in the midcervix. _Brucellae_ may enter the body through mucous membranes, conjunctivae, wounds, or intact skin in both people and animals.

_Brucellae_ have been recovered from fetuses and from manure that has remained in a cool environment for > 2 months. Exposure to direct sunlight kills the organisms within a few hours.

Clinical Findings:
Abortion is the most obvious manifestation. Infections may also cause stillborn or weak calves, retained placentas, and reduced milk yield. Usually, general health is not impaired in uncomplicated abortions.

Seminal vesicles, ampullae, testicles, and epididymides may be infected in bulls; therefore, organisms are present in the semen. Agglutinins may be demonstrated in seminal plasma from infected bulls. Testicular abscesses may occur. Longstanding infections may result in arthritic joints in some cattle.

Diagnosis:
Diagnosis is based on bacteriology or serology. _B abortus_ can be recovered from the placenta but more conveniently in pure culture from the stomach and lungs of an aborted fetus. Most cows cease shedding organisms from the genital tract when uterine involution is complete. Foci of infection remain in some parts of the reticuloendothelial system, especially supramammary lymph nodes, and in the udder. Udder secretions are the preferred specimens for culture from a live cow.

Serum agglutination tests have been the standard diagnostic method. Agglutination tests may also detect antibodies in milk, whey, and semen. An ELISA has been developed to detect antibodies in milk and serum. When the standard plate or tube serum agglutination test is used, complete agglutination at dilutions of 1:100 or more in serum samples of nonvaccinated animals, and of 1:200 of animals vaccinated at 4-12 month of age, are considered positive, and the animals are classified as reactors. Other tests that may be used are complement fixation, rivanol precipitation, and acidified antigen procedures.

Screening Tests:
In official eradication programs on an area basis, the _Brucella_ milk ring test (BRT) has effectively located infected dairy herds, but there are many false-positive tests. The brucellosis status of dairy herds in any area can be monitored by implementing the BRT at 3- to 4-mo intervals. Milk samples from individual herds are collected at the farm or milk processing plant. Cows in herds with a positive BRT are individually blood tested, and seropositive cows are slaughtered to determine herd status.

Nondairy and dairy herds in an area may also be screened for brucellosis by testing serum samples collected from cattle destined for slaughter or replacements through intermediate and terminal markets, or at abattoirs. Reactors are traced to the herd of origin, and the herd is tested. The cost of identifying reactors by this method is minimal compared with that of testing cattle in all herds. Screening tests, including the brucellosis card (or rose bengal) test and plate test, may be used in markets and laboratories to identify presumptively infected animals, thus reducing the number of more expensive and laborious diagnostic tests.

Brucellosis-free areas can be achieved and maintained, effectively and economically, by using the BRT on dairy herds and through market cattle testing. Adult cattle are sampled at the time of slaughter.

Supplemental tests using sensitive screening methods may be used in cattle in which the brucellosis status is unclear. Use of a battery of these tests improves the probability of detecting infected cattle that have remained in some herds as possible reservoirs of infection. Supplemental tests are also used to clarify the results of plate or card tests, especially in serum samples from vaccinated cattle. These tests, which include complement fixation and rivanol precipitation, are designed to detect primarily the antibodies specifically associated with _Brucella_ infection. Another supplemental diagnostic procedure is to test milk samples from individual udder quarters by serial dilution BRT, which can be used to detect chronic infection in udders of cows that may have equivocal serum test reactions.

Control:
Efforts are directed at detection and prevention, because no practical treatment is available. Eventual eradication depends on testing and eliminating reactors. The disease has been eradicated from many individual herds and areas by this method. Herds must be tested at regular intervals until 2 or 3 successive tests are negative.

Noninfected herds must be protected. The greatest danger is from replacement animals. Additions should be vaccinated calves or nonpregnant heifers. If pregnant or fresh cows are added, they should originate from brucellosis-free areas or herds and be seronegative. Replacements should be isolated for ~30 days and retested before being added to the herd.

Vaccination of calves with _B abortus_ Strain 19 or RB51 increases resistance to infection. Resistance may not be complete, and some vaccinated calves may become infected, depending on severity of exposure. A small percentage of vaccinated calves develop antibodies to Strain 19 that may persist for years and can confuse diagnostic test results. To minimize this problem, calves in the USA are mostly vaccinated with a vaccine of Strain RB51. It is a rough attenuated strain and does not cause production of antibodies, which are detected by most serologic tests.

Whole-herd adult cattle vaccination using Strain 19 or RB51 has been practiced in certain high-incidence areas and selected herds in the USA with much success.

Vaccination as the sole means of disease control has been effective. Reduction in the number of reactors in a herd is directly related to the percentage of vaccinated animals. However, when proceeding from a control to an eradication program, a test and slaughter program becomes necessary. _B abortus_ has been eradicated from cattle herds in the USA, and all states are considered free of brucellosis. (Extracted from: https://www.merckvetmanual.com/reproductive-system/brucellosis-in-large-animals/brucellosis-in-cattle) - Mod.TG

ProMED map:
Barinas, Barinas, Venezuela: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8706318,25275]
See Also
Bovine tuberculosis - Brazil: wildlife 20220309.8701888
2014
----
Brucellosis - Brazil: (PR) slaughterhouse workers 20140219.2287605
2005
----
Brucellosis, human, bovine - Venezuela 20051007.2932
.................................................tg/may/ml
</body>
