<header id=043371>
Published Date: 2013-04-02 06:35:56 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Hendra virus, equine - Australia (03): vaccine development
Archive Number: 20130402.1615448
</header>
<body id=043371>
HENDRA VIRUS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA (03): VACCINE DEVELOPMENT
**********************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 16 Mar 2013
Source: Weekend Australian [edited]
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/features/high-stakes/story-e6frg8h6-1226597475505


Natalie Beohm, 25, is one of only 3 known survivors of Hendra virus. Her friend and mentor, Ben Cunneen, a 33-year-old equine vet who was also struck down, died the day after she was released from hospital [in 1994].

The Redlands eruption in outer Brisbane proved to be the turning point. It spurred development of a world-1st vaccine for horses and a prototype treatment for people. American military scientists working in the shadow of the 9/11 attacks on the US joined the effort, fearing the virus would be seized upon by terrorists and used as a biological weapon. Millions of dollars were spent on a program that has been hailed as "one of the best success stories" of biodefence-related research in the world.

To understand what she [Beohm] went through, you need to know not only what the virus is and what it does, but where it came from. So rewind, back to when Beohm was a little girl who lived to ride horses, to the stables of an irascible trainer named Vic Rail, sandwiched between the racecourses of Doomben and Eagle Farm in Brisbane. The suburban streets echo to the clip-clop of horses being walked to track work at dawn. Overhead, the last flying foxes flap to their nesting spots, inky specks against a glimmering sky. The year is 1994; the place is called Hendra.

1994
----
On 9 Sep 1994, one of his [Vic Rail] mares, Drama Series, went berserk at the Hendra stables. The vet found Rail sitting on the horse's head, trying to calm it. There was nothing to do but put it down. Quegent became ill 2 days later, and Rail wasn't feeling too well himself. He told friends that he had been diagnosed with Ross River fever, and it seemed to be playing up again. Ten days later, another 9 horses were down, and Rail was bed-ridden, too sick to lend a hand. He was looking more like his ailing horses, gripped by uncontrollable shakes and fever, his breathing laboured.

Virologist Gary Crameri and his colleagues at the CSIRO's high-security Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) in Geelong soon established it was a novel virus, one not seen before. Alarm bells sounded.

It turned out to be a paramyxovirus, related to those that cause mumps and measles in people and distemper in dogs. Only it behaved differently. Most viruses are species-specific and tend to lose potency if they jump from animals to people. But not Hendra or the other viral pathogens spread by bats, Hendra's virological twin Nipah virus; Ebola; SARS; rabies; and lyssavirus, which killed an 8-year-old north Queensland boy recently, its 3rd victim. "When we did the work on Hendra in the lab, it almost didn't matter what cell type we put it into," says Crameri, who joined AAHL in 1995. "It destroyed them all."

1995
----
A 2nd human Hendra victim was confirmed in October 1995 with the death of Mackay sugarcane farmer Mark Preston, 35, who was found to have contracted the virus 13 months earlier.

Not for the 1st time, luck would play its part in the Hendra saga. Had the virus emerged in another country, the research simply could not have been done. The AAHL is the only lab in the world capable of accommodating full-grown horses at biosafety level 4: they can be walked into the lab and kept in isolation in railed stalls for up to 9 days. When Nipah virus broke out in Malaysia in 1999, infecting thousands of pigs and killing more than 100 people, the scientific world started to take careful note of the work emanating from Geelong.

In 1999, Christopher Broder, a professor of emerging infectious diseases at the military-backed Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Maryland [USA], had approached the AAHL to join forces to tackle Nipah and Hendra. "I suggested that their ability to work with live virus combined with our expertise in molecular virology and vaccine and therapeutics development would dovetail quite well," Broder recalls.

Small wonder the Americans were concerned by the appearance in Malaysia and subsequently Bangladesh of Nipah virus, which is transmitted from bat to pig to person. A saving grace of Hendra is that it is not known to spread between people, though Crameri cautions it is entirely feasible that it could. In Bangladesh, there are worrying signs that Nipah virus can jump from bats directly to the human population, and there is evidence that person-to-person transmission has happened in Malaysia. "You probably just need a warm garden shed and the right cell cultures, and you could grow Nipah," Middleton says. "And, like Hendra, it is available in the environment. It is there, living in bat colonies."

"Basically, we have successfully made an astoundingly efficacious vaccine to both Hendra and Nipah virus infection." More recently, the vaccine has also been shown to completely protect monkeys, paving the way for its possible use in people, Broder says.

Middleton tapped her contacts among the top veterinary medicine-makers, but none were interested. Reluctantly, she resolved to bide her time. CSIRO's vaccine adjuvant, the X-factor that supercharges the immune system's response, was not formulated to an "industrial" standard, and the work would have to be redone. "To me, it was a waste of effort," she remembers. Until, that is, the horse in yard 19 of the Redlands Veterinary Clinic got sick.

2008
----
They might be called fruit bats, but the preferred fare of the Little Red Flying Fox, the most common species in Australia, are the flowers of native trees. They feast on the nectar and spread the pollen far and wide, seeding the landscape. In the early winter of 2008, the eucalypts surrounding the Redland clinic, bayside in Brisbane's southeast, were full of snowy blossoms. As an added temptation to bats, the hedges around [horse] Truly Gifted's corral in yard 19 were thick with wild fruit. On Thu 26 June 2008 [midwinter in Australia], the horse's temperature soared.

Hendra takes between 7 and 21 days to incubate in people, much longer than is the case with horses, but its onslaught is just as terrible. Once established, there is little to be done. "We don't have any compounds that actually work against the virus," says the PA Hospital's director of infectious diseases, Geoffrey Playford, who treated Beohm and Cunneen. The best hope was to keep them alive long enough for their immune systems to kick in. The progression of their symptoms reflected how Hendra attacks the body: 1st the lungs, then the brain. In time, every organ can be infected. "I can remember Dr Playford coming in and saying, 'I don't know what to do'," Beohm says.

"Everything changed after Redlands. It was a wake-up call to us all," Deborah Middleton says. Hendra's 4th human victim was to be her vet, Alister Rodgers. News of his death, giving Hendra a 60 per cent fatality rate among the 7 people known to have contracted it, flashed around the world. Building on their work with Middleton's team at AAHL, Broder and another colleague, Dimitar Dimitrov of the NIH, had pinpointed a human antibody to neutralise Hendra and Nipah. When cloned, this provided the basis of a drug therapy that proved promising in lab trials with ferrets and green monkeys. The treatment was tried on Rodgers, but so little of the experimental drug was available that, according to Playford, only a 10th of the required dose could be given.

Shocked by Rodgers' death, Debbie Dekker decided that her organisation, the Queensland Horse Council, had to get involved. She wrote to every politician she could think of, starting with then Queensland premier, Anna Bligh, appealing for funding for the horse vaccine. Middleton had let it slip that the scientific work was complete, and "basically it was sitting there, waiting to be grabbed," Dekker says.

The Queensland and federal governments jointly kicked in AUD 600 000 [USD 627 450] to fund a final proving trial for the horse vaccine, along with money for the University of Queensland's Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology to formulate a medicine-quality supply of the antibody treatment for people. 4 horses were inoculated in a secure compound outside the AAHL complex and brought into the lab to be dosed with the virus. The vaccine did its job in every instance.

The final piece of the jigsaw fell into place when US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer stepped up. Mike van Blommestein, the boss of its 80 per cent-owned animal health division, Zoetis Australia, found himself sitting next to Queensland's chief vet Rick Symons at an industry dinner where they got to talking about the final horse vaccine trials. "I said to him, 'Hell, we can also get involved ... we've got the technology'," van Blommestein says. "All of a sudden, it all came together," Middleton adds. "We had the money to do the horse work here; we could actually use a commercial vaccine formulation through Pfizer which would shorten the path to registration ... and we had access to this huge experience and expertise in vaccine-making."

Given the threat posed by Hendra, you would think that horse owners would be lining up for it. Not so. The take-up has been underwhelming since the vaccine's release on 1 Nov last year [2012]. As of 1 Mar [2013], just 23 947 doses of vaccine had been sold, few of them outside the danger zone in Queensland and northern NSW.

One disincentive, according to Dekker, is that there are strings attached to using the vaccine. Due to its fast-tracked production, it was not conventionally licensed. As an interim measure, the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority has allowed accredited vets to give the required injections, exactly 21 days apart, under what is known as a Minor Use Permit. This is a recognised pathway to registration but one not particularly familiar to the equine industry. All up, the cost of vaccination comes in at between AUD 100-200 [USD 104-209] per animal, industry sources say. Dekker says the owners of "low-value" animals might consider that a stretch. The industry's concerns don't stop there, however. The vaccine's proven effectiveness in the lab doesn't translate to hard, fast guarantees of how it will work in the field. How long does the immunity last? At least 6 months and probably much longer, Middleton says, but she can't be specific because the data simply does not exist at this point.

One persistent rumour involves a purported risk to mares in foal. "The horse industry is full of myths," says Dekker, who dismisses it as unfounded. Zoetis Australia says a study is under way into the vaccine's use on pregnant mares. Vaccines made from live virus are known to be hazardous to horses in foal, but its Hendra prophylactic, Equivac HeV, is a synthetic sub-unit vaccine with no such downside. "Not having a safety study does not mean the vaccine is unsafe, just that a study has not been completed," the company says. Inevitably, there will be commercial implications unless sales improve, van Blommestein warns. "If it isn't taken up, the commercial interests could kick in here where we simply say it's not worth our while ... I wouldn't want to be putting any threats like that out, because we want to see this thing through. But the fact of the matter is the smaller the production volume, the higher is the cost of your production per unit."

The organisers of the Royal Queensland Show have taken the decision out of the hands of horse owners if they want to be involved in this year's [2013] Ekka. All horses entered in the show must be vaccinated.

2011
----
The need, however, has probably never been greater for action. In 2011, Hendra struck more widely than ever, with a record 18 outbreaks that killed or forced the destruction of 22 horses. Dusty the dog, on a quarantined property southwest of Brisbane, became the 1st outside a lab to return a positive test result. Eight separate sites of infection emerged in NSW as the virus extended its known reach to Macksville on the state's mid-north coast, the furthest south it had been detected. The federal, NSW and Queensland governments jointly lifted funding to AUD 13 million [USD 13.6 million] to find out what was going on.

Hume Field's researchers from the Queensland Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases established that fruit bats were shedding the virus in unprecedented numbers. Usually, only 10 per cent of them are infectious at any one time. Urine sampling at the height of the outbreak in mid-winter 2011 suggested that up to 70 per cent of the animals in some colonies were excreting the virus. The suspicion was that the devastating floods of the previous summer had stressed the bats, possibly by destroying food sources and habitats, making them more susceptible to the virus. Field is not so sure. The longer he looks, the more convinced he is that there is no single reason for Hendra to erupt. "You need to have a combination of things happen to have a bad year," he says.

Field also points to the "hungry horse" theory. Pasture tends to die back in winter, possibly impelling horses to eat contaminated bat spats. He says he can't rule out the involvement of a "super-shedder," a kind of rogue flying fox that excretes vast quantities of virus.

2013
----
The organisers of the Royal Queensland Show have taken the decision out of the hands of horse owners if they want to be involved in this year's [2013] Ekka. All horses entered in the show must be vaccinated.

[Byline: Jamie Walker]

--
Communicated by:
Mike Nunn <Mike.Nunn@aciar.gov.au>

[Many vaccines receive conditional license to get the product to those in need in a timely fashion. This also allows some less costly information gathering to support full registration. Most vaccines given conditional licensing will get full licensure.

West Nile virus was such an example in the USA. It received conditional licensure, and people started using it immediately. A short time later, it received full licensure.

The Hendra virus is in the conditional licensure stages. But, it has been shown to be safe and efficacious, or it would not have received a conditional licence.

The cost does seem rather high, but horse owners need to support the vaccine and start to build a wall of resistance around these animals. While beauty around show grounds and stables is great, if it represents a danger to the animals, then it should be removed. The trees and bushes that are an attractant to the bats should be removed or fenced to prevent the horses from grazing under them, at least until bloom and fruit season are over. That is a physical barrier type of protection.

Vaccination would be an immune barrier for the animal. I sincerely hope that horse owners will take the necessary precautions and vaccinate their horses. Once the horse is dead, it is too late to vaccinate, and then you are left with regrets. Spend the money, save the horses, and spare the regrets.

Australia may be found on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at: http://healthmap.org/r/1z_*.

Please see the original source website to read the complete unedited version. It is fascinating and a great insight into how a virus is identified and then moved to a vaccine. A very good read! - Mod.TG]

[I would think horse owners (& veterinarians)in the endemic states would have their horses vaccinated as a form of health insurance for themseves. There have been horse cases in Queensland this year, and bats have been found positive in Victoria & the coast of South Australia, vastly widening the risk area -- see ProMED ref. below.
- Mod.JW]
See Also
Hendra virus, equine - Australia: (02) (QL) 20130224.1557005
Hendra virus, equine - Australia: (QL), RFI 20130124.1512182
Hendra virus, bats - Australia: (SA) 1st detection 20130119.1505446
2012
----
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (13): (QL) new vaccine 20121106.1393589
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (12): (QL) vaccine 20121104.1390394
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (11): (QL) all clear 20121019.1354012
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (10): (QL) 20120907.1284588
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (09): (QL) 20120728.1218748
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (08): (QL) 20120720.1208397
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (07): (QL) 20120629.1184444
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (06): (QL) canine & equine testing 20120620.1173735
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (05) (QL): canine exposure 20120606.1157585
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (04): (QL) vaccine research 20120601.1152600
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (03): (QL) human exposure 20120531.1151213
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (02): update 20120218.1045846
Hendra virus, equine - Australia: (QL) 20120106.1001359
2011
----
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (21): (QL) canine 20110802.2324
2010
----
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (02): (QL) human exp. 20100521.1688
2009
----
Hendra virus, human, equine - Australia (04): (QL) fatal 20090903.3098
2008
----
Hendra virus, human, equine - Australia (07): (QLD) 20080821.2606
.................................................jw/tg/msp/jw
</body>
