<header id=044498>
Published Date: 2011-11-12 06:10:26 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Lead poisoning, human - Nigeria
Archive Number: 20111112.3352
</header>
<body id=044498>
LEAD POISONING, HUMAN - NIGERIA
*******************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 11 Nov 2011
Source: World Health Organization [edited]
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2011_11_11/en/index.html


Mass lead poisoning from mining activities
------------------------------------------
The mass lead poisoning from mining activities in Zamfara State in
Nigeria, which was discovered in March 2010, continues to affect
villagers in 3 Local Government Areas (LGAs): Anka, Bukkuyum and
Maru.

While the full scale of the problem is still not fully determined, a
survey carried out by the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (US CDC) at the request of the Nigeria Federal Ministry of
Health has revealed at least 43 villages in Zamfara State where there
are confirmed cases of lead poisoning. In at least 7 of these villages
there are children who need chelation therapy. This is in addition to
the 7 villages that have now been remediated.

With the combined effects of removal from lead exposure and chelation
and other supportive therapy, the mortality rate among exposed
children in 7 remediated villages has dropped from 43 percent in 2010
to 1 percent in 2011.

Actions taken
-------------
WHO and multiple partners have been assisting state and federal
authorities to manage the situation, which cannot be resolved without
sustained changes to mining practices to prevent further environmental
contamination with lead. These include relocation of ore processing
activities and storage of ore materials away from villages, the
adoption of new processing methods that produce less dust, as well as
hygiene measures such as removing contaminated clothes and washing
before returning home.

WHO is continuing to advocate with the Government in Nigeria for their
attention to this problem and to gain their commitment to further
sustained action to prevent the serious and life-long consequences of
lead poisoning in a generation of children in Zamfara.

The response to the mass lead poisoning in Zamfara State has involved
multiple agencies, including WHO, United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) - Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit, Medecins Sans
Frontieres (MSF), the US CDC, the Blacksmith Institute, TerraGraphics
Environmental Engineering Inc, and the Artisanal Gold Council, working
with authorities and leaders at community, state and federal level.

With funding of USD 1.9 million provided by the UN Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) to WHO and UNICEF, the following activities have
been carried out:
-- remediation of 5 villages (Abare, Tungar Guru, Tungar Daji, Sunke
and Duza);
-- social mobilization and community awareness activities directed at
informing local communities about the hazards of lead and how to
prevent lead exposure, including safer mining and gold extraction
processes;
-- advocacy activities with state and federal authorities, and
community leaders;
-- establishment of a surveillance system for the early detection of
lead poisoning in Zamfara State;
-- provision of 3 hand-held x-ray fluorescence devices for the rapid
measurement of lead concentrations in soil;
-- provision of 4 point-of-care analyzers and their kits for the rapid
measurement of blood lead concentrations;
-- provision of a graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometer,
ancillary equipment and reagents, as well as technical advice, for the
establishment of a reference laboratory for the measurement of lead;
-- training for doctors, nursing and laboratory staff at the planned
lead treatment centre in Gusau on the diagnosis and management of lead
poisoning;
-- provision of antidotal agents for the treatment of lead poisoning;

-- co-ordination of partners involved in the response activities.

The remediation work has been organized by the Blacksmith Institute
and TerraGraphics Environmental Engineering Inc, working with the
Zamfara State authorities and local contractors. Remediation has
involved the identification of contaminated areas in the villages,
removal of all contaminated soil, its disposal in secure landfill
sites and its replacement with clean soil. In addition walls and other
surfaces in family compounds have been cleaned. A total of 7 villages
have now been remediated, 2 having been completed before the CERF
funding was available. TerraGraphics has provided training in
assessment and remediation procedures so that they can be continued by
local agencies.

MSF has continued to provide chelation therapy for lead-poisoned
children in the decontaminated villages and now has more than 2000
children less than 5 years of age on its treatment programme.

Ongoing challenges
------------------
This serious environmental emergency cannot be resolved quickly.
Remediation is a challenging and time-consuming task. Children have to
wait for their family compounds to be cleaned before they can start
treatment, and some children will require chelation for many months.
Persuading people to adopt new practices and behaviours requires
continuing effort. In addition, capacities within Nigeria for the
diagnosis and management of lead poisoning need further strengthening
and support. A further challenge is the purchase of sufficient
chelating agents: these are expensive drugs that are not available as
generics. There is therefore a need for long-term engagement on the
part of leaders and authorities at community, state and federal levels
in Nigeria, as well as health and environment professionals, technical
partners and donors.

Of particular concern is the town of Bagega in Anka Local Government
Area, which is a regional hub for ore processing and the informal gold
trade. Many family compounds and communal areas in the town have soil
lead concentrations above 1000 ppm (400 ppm is the limit in the USA
for areas where there are children), and it is estimated that 1500
young children may be poisoned with lead. Before these children can be
treated they must have a clean environment to live in. There is
therefore an urgent need to decontaminate Bagega and the other
villages and to provide chelation and other therapy.

--
Communicated by:
Marianne Hopp
<mjhopp12@yahoo.com>

[Lead is a metal with no known biological benefit to humans. Too much
lead can damage various systems of the body including the nervous and
reproductive systems and the kidneys, and it can cause high blood
pressure and anemia.

Lead accumulates in the bones, and lead poisoning may be diagnosed
from a blue line around the gums. Lead is especially harmful to the
developing brains of fetuses and young children and to pregnant women.


Lead interferes with the metabolism of calcium and Vitamin D. However
treatment with vitamin D or other vitamins does nothing to treat lead
intoxication.

High blood lead levels in children can cause consequences which may be
irreversible including learning disabilities, behavioral problems, and
mental retardation. At very high levels, lead can cause convulsions,
coma and death.

People are exposed to lead through the air they breathe, through water
and through food/ingestion. Toxic effects are usually due to long-term
exposure. The population groups at greatest risk of exposure are young
children and workers. A report suggests that even a blood level of 10
micrograms per decilitre (10ug/dl) can have harmful effects on
children's learning and behavior (CDC, 2000).

People can be exposed to lead contamination from the motor vehicle
exhaust of leaded gasoline, as well as from industrial sources such as
smelters and lead manufacturing and recycling industries, from cottage
industry uses and waste sites (e.g., contaminated landfills).

The effects of lead are the same whether it enters the body through
breathing or swallowing. Lead can affect almost every organ and system
in your body. The main target for lead toxicity is the nervous system,
both in adults and children. Long-term exposure of adults can result
in decreased performance in some tests that measure functions of the
nervous system. It may also cause weakness in fingers, wrists, or
ankles. Lead exposure also causes small increases in blood pressure,
particularly in middle-aged and older people and can cause anemia.
Exposure to high lead levels can severely damage the brain and kidneys
in adults or children and ultimately cause death. In pregnant women,
high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage. High-level
exposure in men can damage the organs responsible for sperm
production.

A blood test is available to measure the amount of lead in your blood
and to estimate the amount of recent exposure to lead. Blood tests are
commonly used to screen children for lead poisoning.

Lead in teeth or bones can be measured by X-ray techniques, but these
methods are not widely available. Exposure to lead also can be
evaluated by measuring erythrocyte protoporphyrin (EP) in blood
samples. EP is a part of red blood cells known to increase when the
amount of lead in the blood is high. However, the EP level is not
sensitive enough to identify children with elevated blood lead levels
below about 25 micrograms per deciliter (microg/dL). These tests
usually require special analytical equipment that is not available in
a doctor's office.

Elevated blood lead levels are treated with chelation therapy, a
specific type of medication. The chelating agents decrease blood lead
levels by binding to the lead, so that it can be excreted in the
urine. Medications include DMSA (also called Chemet, Succimer or
Dimercaptosuccinic acid), an oral drug that binds to lead and mercury
and is given every 8 hours for 5 days and then every 12 hours for 2
more weeks. It is usually used for blood lead levels between 45 and
69. The lead level should be rechecked 7 - 21 days after treatment is
begun to determine if treatment has been adequate. Other chelating
agents that are used for treatment of symptomatic lead poisoning and
for blood lead levels of more than 69 is EDTA (Calcium Disodium EDTA)
which is given as a continuous infusion or as intramuscular injections
for 3 - 5 days, and BAL (British anti-lewisite or dimercaprol) which
is given as an injection.

Portions of the above commentary have been extracted from the
following web sites:
http://www.keepkidshealthy.com/welcome/lead/leadtreatment.html
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/diseases/lead/en
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/tfacts13.html - Mod.TG

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Nigeria is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1qGF - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
2006
----
Lead poisoning - China (Gansu) (04) 20061105.3177
Lead poisoning - China (Gansu) (03) 20060917.2653
Lead poisoning - China (Gansu) (02) 20060916.2628
Lead poisoning - China (Gansu) 20060907.2534
.................................................tg/ejp/dk
</body>
