<header id=057793>
Published Date: 2013-04-12 12:43:59 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Avian influenza (35): China, LPAI H7N9, update
Archive Number: 20130412.1641185
</header>
<body id=057793>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (35): CHINA, LPAI H7N9, UPDATE
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] European assessment: Eurosurveillance
[2] Hong Kong: assessment of risk by bird migration
[3] Shanghai zoo: precautionary measure
[4] Beijing: alertness and monitoring

******
[1] European assessment: Eurosurveillance
Date: Thu 11 Apr 2013
Source: Eurosurveillance Edition 2013, 18(15) [summ., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20452


A novel reassortant avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China -- what are the implications for Europe
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: A Nicoll, N Danielsson (Date of submission: 10 Apr 2013)
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), Stockholm, Sweden]

As of 10 Apr 2013, 33 human cases infected with a novel influenza A(H7N9) virus have been laboratory confirmed in Shanghai, Anhui, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces in China [see map titled "Laboratory-confirmed influenza A(H7N9) cases in China as of 10 Apr 2013 (n=33)" at http://www.eurosurveillance.org/images/dynamic/EE/V18N15/Nicoll_fig1.jpg].

This case count came after on 31 Mar 2013, the Chinese authorities had announced the identification of a novel influenza A virus, an A(H7N9) virus, in 3 people in Shanghai and Anhui provinces. 2 men in Shanghai, 87 and 27 years old, respectively, had become ill with influenza-like (ILI) symptoms and progressed to severe lower respiratory tract infections within a week in mid to late February 2013, and died from acute respiratory distress syndrome hereafter. The 2 had no epidemiological link and no known exposure to evidently sick animals. One of them was a pork butcher. The 3rd case was a 35-year-old woman from Anhui province, adjacent to Shanghai, who also became ill with ILI with symptom onset on 9 Mar 2013 followed by severe respiratory disease and death.

The detection of these cases was possible because of a well-functioning surveillance system with a laboratory component through which the initially non-subtypeable influenza A viruses were sent to the World Health Organization (WHO) Influenza Collaborating Centre at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Beijing for sequencing. Upon laboratory identification of the new viruses, the responsible Chinese authorities notified the cases as required in the International Health Regulations (IHR) to WHO and other member states.

Moreover, researchers from the Chinese CDC posted the genetic information of the viruses on the publicly accessible GISAID website. The viruses were not genetically identical, indicating they had been circulating for some time over a wide region. The same type of viruses were reported by Chinese veterinary authorities from 4 Apr 2013 onward in different species of poultry and environmental samples from live bird markets in Shanghai. The sequences of the veterinary and environmental specimens were also posted on the GISAID site by the Chinese national veterinary laboratory in Harbin.

Following the detection of the 1st cases, the Chinese CDC has rapidly made specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test kits for the new A(H7N9) viruses available to provincial and local laboratories across China to ensure timely testing of suspected cases. Since then individual human cases are being confirmed and made public daily by the Chinese authorities at provincial level in the 4 affected provinces. More cases are being detected with onset dates since late March 2013. [As of 12 Apr 2013, 43 human cases, including 11 deaths, have been reported]. While this could simply reflect increasing awareness among clinicians and public health authorities and that testing became available more widely, close monitoring is necessary to detect changes in transmission patterns, especially human-to-human transmission and cases appearing in China beyond the 4 provinces.

While the novel A(H7N9) virus has been detected in birds and environmental specimens at a bird markets in Shanghai and the other affected provinces, the source of infection in most of the cases still remains to be determined. It is equally unclear how the virus is introduced into the markets. Nevertheless, China has stepped up vigilance and intensified human and animal surveillance. It has also implemented public health measures that include the closure of some live poultry and bird markets and culling of birds.

A striking feature is that human cases are sporadic and very few possible clusters have been detected. They are being investigated by the Chinese authorities. So far, there has been no documented sustained human-to-human transmission and there is no clear indication of such transmission even though the virus has genetic markers that are known to be associated with improved replication of avian influenza viruses in mammals.

When compared with A(H5N1) viruses, animal-to-human transmissibility seems to be higher for influenza A(H7N9). It is noteworthy that the timeframe during which cases have been identified is very different from that of human cases of influenza A(H5N1) detected in China of late. Between January 2010 and March 2013, only 7 human A(H5N1) cases were reported, 5 of which are known to have died. Few human cases due to infection with avian influenza A(H7) viruses have been described in the literature, possibly because the symptoms are usually mild in humans and of low pathogenicity in poultry. A well described outbreak involving humans was that of a highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H7N7) among poultry in the Netherlands in 2003. It resulted in 86 mild infections, mainly conjunctivitis, among poultry workers, 3 cases of non-sustained human-to-human transmission among their household contacts, but only one fatality.

Only careful serological surveys in China can reveal if there were such transmissions and these investigations are underway. Of the detected 33 human A(H7N9) cases as of 10 Apr 2013, 30 developed severe illness with 9 fatalities while 3 presented with mild symptoms. It can be expected that surveillance activities will lead to detection of additional cases in the coming weeks, but so far no cases have been identified outside the 4 Chinese Provinces.

A limited number of scenarios that could follow from the emergence of this novel virus are possible. The one that explains the current human and animal epidemiological situation best, based on available clinical and virological analyses, is that of the emergence of a novel reassortant avian influenza virus of low pathogenicity to birds but of significant pathogenicity to humans. This virus has probably spread undetected among poultry in parts of eastern China. When this started is unclear. It only came to light because some people infected through contact with birds or environmental exposure, became severely ill. Even though the viruses were found in poultry and the environment in live bird markets in Shanghai, the species introducing the infection into the markets has not been identified. The various species reported as being infected may have only become infected at the markets.

The speed, transparency and intensity of the work performed in respect to the novel A(H7N9) virus in China and by the Chinese CDC and veterinary authorities is impressive and deserves full credit. It also has to be acknowledged that there is tremendous value for all those concerned with public health in that the WHO Collaborating Centre for Influenza at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention has shared the viruses and that the molecular data have been published on the publicly accessible GISAID database. This data sharing platform has been important for scientists to gain important insight into the molecular virus characteristics and the origins of the virus as well as for public health experts to assess the current situation.

However, the tasks lying ahead, namely analysing, describing, and especially controlling the virus cannot be underestimated. The extent of distribution of this A(H7N9) virus in domestic poultry in China and possibly other countries is unclear and surveillance and control of a low pathogenicity avian influenza virus in countries with complex mixes of informal and formal poultry sectors will be challenging. The markers of poultry die-offs seen with high pathogenicity avian influenza A viruses such as H5N1 and H7N7, will not signal the presence of the new A(H7N9) virus. In such situations, animal surveillance on the basis of sampling of live birds, including wild birds, such as done in Hong Kong and in European Union (EU) countries will be essential.

What are the possible implications of the current situation for Europe and European citizens and which actions should the EU take and which ones have been taken already? The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) published its 1st risk assessment on 3 Apr 2013 [see at http://tinyurl.com/cgzab2a] and is providing updated assessments and short reports on the epidemiology as new information emerges. Several guidance documents on prevention of infections, infection control and case management developed earlier for influenza by ECDC, WHO and Member States are, with some modifications, applicable to the current situation. Visitors to China and other countries where avian influenzas have caused severe human disease of late, should avoid visiting bird markets and follow basic hygienic measures. Persons returning from China who develop severe respiratory infection within 10 days should be evaluated and tested for the new virus to rule out such infection, though most likely another infection will be detected. Case management and infection control guidelines for A(H5N1) apply in the short term. This will include antiviral treatment given that the Chinese CDC promptly established that the A(H7N9) viruses are susceptible to neuraminidase inhibitors.

Some candidate H7 and H9 [human] vaccines viruses already exist under WHO's strain selection system for the eventuality of an emerging virus. They may not be effective against the new influenza A(H7N9) virus and once the regulatory laboratories have obtained the novel virus, WHO and presumably EU authorities will now need to consider if they wish to proceed with the very early stages of vaccine development as has been done for the candidate H7 and H9 viruses.

Overall, how concerned Europe should be cannot yet be determined. The new virus is a reassortant virus based on an haemaglutinin antigen A(H7) to which most humans will not have been exposed. Therefore, if human-to-human transmission starts, and that is only an 'if', population immunity cannot be presumed. It would have to be assessed now by determining age-specific sero-reactivity of human sera to this influenza A(H7N9) virus as a priority. Immunity, or lack of it, in the human population are key data required for assessing pandemic risk. As stated above, they needed to come from field investigations in China as well as seroepidemiological studies in Europe based on protocols developed precisely for such situations.

At this very moment it cannot be ruled out that there are some human-to-human transmissions causing mild or asymptomatic infections as happened in the Netherlands in 2003. It also remains unclear to what extent the predominance of severe disease may represent a bias because mainly people with severe disease are tested. Investigations of patients' contacts including serological studies, will clarify this point. Such investigations orchestrated by the Chinese CDC are underway.

There will be many other calls for research and it will be important and difficult to prioritise. Fortunately a framework exists for making decisions on priorities. The Influenza Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT) has been developed since 2011 for this purpose by the United States (US) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention with some international partners. It looks at 10 parameters bundled into 3 families: properties of the virus, attributes of the population, ecology and epidemiology. It has already been deployed to inform US decisions on the A(H3N2)v vaccines. It does not predict pandemic risk or make decisions but it informs decisions. Though the IRAT is still being evaluated as a tool it will certainly indicate what should be some of the most important public health research priorities for A(H7N9).

It is also important that the sequence and virological analyses are considered in combination with the epidemiological findings. Despite the virological markers described in the recent report from the WHO Collaborating Centres it should not be seen as inevitable on the longer term that this reassortant A(H7N9) will develop efficient human-to-human transmissibility or become established in Europe, though both should be kept in mind as possibilities. Neither has happened for the highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) virus in the decade and a half since its emergence in China in 1996. Despite multiple detections of the A(H5N1)virus in wild birds and some outbreaks in domestic poultry flocks in Europe, the high levels of biosafety in the EU have not permitted A(H5N1) viruses to become established in European domestic poultry. It is fortunate that the European Commission and the Member States have since 2007 established surveillance for low pathogenicity avian influenza in domestic and wild birds in Europe. The recent events have underlined the importance of this system.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The full article and references are available at the source URL above.

The EU's Surveillance for avian influenza in domesticated and wild birds is described at http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/diseases/controlmeasures/avian/eu_resp_surveillance_en.htm. The website includes also the annual reports for the years 2005-2011.

Introduction of the new, zoonotic H7N9 virus strain to Europe by migratory birds is a scenario which should be taken into consideration. The low pathogenicity of the current H7N9 virus strain for birds, if definitely confirmed, may be a factor enabling long-distance spread since the birds' health -- and, consequently, their flying records -- will be less or not affected by infection. Incubation periods and duration of viraemia in potential candidate species are factors which deserve enhanced studies. - Mod.AS]

******
[2] Hong Kong: assessment of risk by bird migration
Date: Fri 12 Apr 2013
Source: South China Morning Post, Hong Kong [edited]
http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1213236/h7n9-infected-birds-will-migrate-pearl-river-delta-says


H7N9 infected birds will migrate to Pearl River Delta, says microbiologist
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hong Kong has to be vigilant against the new H7N9 strain of avian flu later this year [2013] when migratory birds head south from northern parts of China for the winter, says a Hong Kong microbiologist.

University of Hong Kong microbiologist Professor Yuen Kwok-yung said on Friday [12 Apr 2013] he believed a large number of wild birds had already contracted the virus in eastern China, where all the cases of human H7N9 had occurred.

Some of them were migratory birds, which were now heading to northern parts of the mainland for summer but would return south to the Pearl River Delta for winter, he said. "This is when Hong Kong's wild birds and poultry may get infected," he said at a press conference on Friday afternoon.

The H7N9 avian flu has killed 10 people in Shanghai and several provinces in eastern China since authorities announced the first infection about 2 weeks ago. So far, 38 human cases have been confirmed.

Yuen, who earlier visited Shanghai and met health officials to learn more about the flu outbreak, said analysis of the virus' genes suggested the chance of human-to-human transmission was low.

He also said southern China and Hong Kong were now largely safe with no traces of the new bird flu virus reported so far. But he urged authorities and the public to remain vigilant.

Dr Owen Tsang Tak-yin, a Hospital Authority official, said Hong Kong had 18 million doses of Tamiflu, a drug that has proven effective in the treatment of bird flu.

[Byline: Lai Yin-kit]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3] Shanghai zoo: precautionary measure
Date: Fri 12 Apr 2013
Source: People's Daily Online, Shanghai Daily report [edited]
http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/90882/8204869.html


Flu curbs mean more beef and mutton at the zoo
----------------------------------------------
Shanghai Zoo and Shanghai Wildlife Park said yesterday [11 Apr 2013] they were feeding animals beef and mutton instead of chicken due to the current bird flu outbreak, but had no plans to follow Suzhou Zoo's example and give a TCM [traditional Chinese medicine] remedy to birds.

The zoo in Suzhou has fed banlangen, a traditional Chinese remedy for the human cold, to its hundreds of birds, including peacocks, flamingos and swans the Modern Express newspaper reported yesterday [11 Apr 2013]. Bai Jiaming, a Shanghai Zoo official, said there was no proof banlangen had an effect on birds.

The Shanghai zoo said chicken previously accounted for just 1 percent of its animals' intake but now beef, mutton, and rabbit would take its place. The main consumers of chicken at the zoo in the past were its pythons.

The zoo's bird enclosures have been closed, and areas where the birds live are being sterilized twice a week.

So far, the zoo's birds, which have been vaccinated against other strains of bird flu, have tested negative for the new strain. The zoo said it had canceled an event due to take place on Saturday [13 Apr 2013] to mark the start of its annual bird spotting event.

Meanwhile, the Shanghai Wildlife Park has suspended all poultry-related activities, including the practice of selling live chickens to visitors to feed to lions and tigers.

The park stopped feeding animals with live chicken on 6 Apr 2013, and has stepped up disinfection and monitoring of wild birds flying in from outside, said Ni Li, a park official.

The flu outbreak has devastated poultry sales in Shanghai and neighboring provinces.

Shanghai has banned the trade in live poultry while similar measures have been taken in the neighboring cities of Nanjing and Suzhou.

Nanjing has banned local residents from raising chicken, ducks, or pigeons at home.

Some live poultry markets in Zhejiang Province were ordered to close while others shut down when demand plummeted.

Sales have suffered even in regions with no bird flu cases. In the northern city of Shijiazhuang, chicken sales fell more than 50 percent at the city's largest agricultural market, China News Service reported.

In Fujian Province, a duck breeder said he had no choice but to kill more than 10 000 ducklings every day because no one had ordered birds for many days and it was too expensive to let them to survive and grow.

[Editor: Gao Yinan, Chen Lida]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[4] Beijing: alertness and monitoring
Date: Fri 12 Apr 2013
Source: CCTV (China Central Television) [edited]
http://english.cntv.cn/program/newsupdate/20130412/105444.shtml

Beijing on alert for bird flu
-----------------------------
Beijing has made preparations to deal with any possible outbreak of H7N9 [avian influenza] in the capital. Health workers have carried out exercises and made action plans. Designated hospitals have prepared medical supplies and trained staff. The city government is also strengthening public health awareness to help prevent the disease.

Beijing is also monitoring poultry and wild birds in the city. The director of the Beijing municipal Public Health Bureau says the government is taking particular care because people have such a broad range of contact with others in such a big city. So far, no cases of H7N9 have been reported in the capital.

[Editor: Zhang Jingya]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[Remarkably, though media reports describe monitoring in wild birds in several locations in China -- including (affected) Shanghai -- so far, no results have become available, preferably to include numbers and species sampled. Such information is in urgent need, globally. - Mod.AS]
See Also
Avian influenza (34): China (ZH), LPAI H7N9, duck, RFI 20130411.1639522
Avian influenza (33): China (JS, ZH) LPAI H7N9, live markets, RFI 20130410.1636843
Avian influenza, human (38): China (SH, JS) H7N9 update 20130409.1633860
Avian influenza (31): China (ZH) H7N9, market quail, unconf. 20130408.1629232
Avian influenza (30): China, H7N9, multiple market closures 20130407.1629270
Avian influenza (29): China H7N9, FAO, biosecurity 20130407.1628375
Avian influenza (28): China (SH) H7N9, OIE, update 20130405.1624901
Avian influenza, human (25): China (SH) H7N9, update 20130404.1622647
Avian influenza, human (17): China (SH, AH) H7N9 background 20130402.1616395
Avian influenza, human (16): China (SH, AH) H7N9 WHO 20130401.1614707
Avian influenza, human (15): China (Shanghai, Anhui) H7N9 20130401.1613895
Avian influenza, human (14): China (Shanghai, Anhui) H7N9, fatal 20130331.1612370
.................................................arn/mj/mpp
</body>
