<header id=018262>
Published Date: 2022-06-10 16:57:23 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Monkeypox update (11)
Archive Number: 20220610.8703793
</header>
<body id=018262>
MONKEYPOX UPDATE (11)
*********************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Cases around the world
[2] United Kingdom
[3] Netherlands
[4] Germany
[5] Greece: 1st report
[6] USA: cases by state
[7] Africa: WHO
[8] Vaccine strategy
[9] Messaging to MSM
[10] Infection consequences

******
[1] Cases around the world
Date: Fri 10 Jun 2022 09:21 EDT
Sources: Reuters [edited]
https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/monkeypox-cases-around-world-2022-05-23/


Around 30 countries where monkeypox is not endemic have reported outbreaks of the viral disease as confirmed cases reached 1300, most of them in Europe.

Monkeypox, which spreads through close contact and was first found in monkeys, mostly occurs in west and central Africa and only very occasionally spreads elsewhere.

Below is a list of non-endemic countries that have so far reported suspected or confirmed cases, in alphabetical order [all cases in 2022]:

Asia-Pacific
- Australia, which on 20 May reported its 1st case, had confirmed 8 cases as of 10 Jun.

Europe
- Austria confirmed its 1st case on 22 May.
- Belgium detected its 1st 2 cases on 20 May and a total of 24 by 8 Jun.
- Czech Republic detected its 1st case on 24 May, reaching a total of 6 as of 2 Jun.
- Denmark confirmed its 1st case on 23 May and a total of 3 as of 3 Jun.
- Finland reported its 1st case on 27 May, the 2nd on 2 Jun.
- France had confirmed 91 cases by 9 Jun.
- Germany reported its 1st case on 20 May and a total of 131 by 9 Jun.
- Gibraltar confirmed its 1st case on 1 Jun.
- Greece detected its 1st case on 8 Jun.
- Hungary reported its 1st case on 31 May and reached a total of 3 by 10 Jun.
- Iceland diagnosed 2 cases on 8 Jun in initial tests, pending confirmation from foreign testing. Local health authority expects the primary diagnosis to be correct.
- Ireland had confirmed 7 cases as of 7 Jun, with 1st on 28 May.
- Italy had detected 29 cases as of 9 Jun, since its 1st on 19 May.
- Latvia confirmed its 1st case on 3 Jun, a 2nd on 8 Jun.
- Malta reported one case on 2 Jun.
- Netherlands, which reported its 1st case on 20 May, had confirmed 60 as of 9 Jun.
- Norway reported its 1st case on 31 May.
- Poland reported its 1st case on 10 Jun.
- Portugal confirmed 18 new cases on 9 Jun, bringing its total to 209.
- Slovenia has reported a total of 6 cases since its 1st one on 24 May.
- Spain had confirmed 259 cases by 9 Jun.
- Sweden confirmed its 1st case on 19 May and a total of 5 by 2 Jun.
- Switzerland had confirmed a total of 12 cases as of 8 Jun, with 1st on 21 May.
- United Kingdom had confirmed 366 cases as of 9 Jun, including 348 cases in England, 12 in Scotland, 2 in Northern Ireland, and 4 in Wales.

Middle East & Africa
- Israel had reported 4 cases as of 9 Jun, with its 1st on 21 May.
- Morocco reported its 1st case on 2 Jun.
- United Arab Emirates had reported a total of 13 infections since its 1st on 24 May.

Americas
- Argentina had confirmed 2 cases as of 2 Jun.
- Brazil recorded its 1st case on 8 Jun.
- Canada had confirmed 112 infections as of 9 Jun.
- Mexico confirmed its 1st case on 28 May.
- United States had confirmed 45 cases in 12 states and the District of [Columbia] by 9 Jun.

Sources: Data from World Health Organization and US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Reuters stories, releases from local authorities.

[Byline: Andrey Sychev, Louise Rasmussen, and Alizee Degorce]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[2] United Kingdom
Date: Wed 8 Jun 2022 15:11 EDT
Source: Daily Mail [abridged, edited]
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-10896545/UK-logs-NINETEEN-cases-monkeypox-virus-elevated-threat-level-plague.html


The UK's monkeypox outbreak requires a "substantial public health response", one of the country's leading COVID experts argued today [8 Jun 2022] as cases in Britain hit 321.

Sir Andrew Pollard, who helped develop the AstraZeneca vaccine, said that the tropical virus outbreak does not pose the same threat as COVID. However, he warned that actions were still needed to contain it. Sir Andrew did not specify what he meant.

Speaking after being knighted by the Prince of Wales for services to public health, he noted that monkeypox "doesn't spread as well as COVID" and "rarely" causes severe disease.

His comments come as UK Health Security Agency bosses today [8 Jun 2022] confirmed 18 more infections in England since Monday [6 Jun 2022], and one in Scotland. It brings the UK total to 321. No further details were given but gay and bisexual men "remain disproportionately affected", officials said.

London remains the epicentre of the outbreak, which has now almost reached 40 countries. Since the virus was first detected on 6 May 2022, 305 cases have been logged in England, while Scotland has reported 11, 2 have been spotted in Northern Ireland, and 3 in Wales. The UK has recorded the most cases in the ever-growing worldwide cluster, followed by Spain (199), Portugal (166), and Canada (100).

Monkeypox is now a notifiable disease in England and Northern Ireland, meaning all medics must alert local health authorities to suspected cases. The tropical virus now carries the same legal status as the plague, rabies, and measles.

Sir Andrew said: "The monkeypox virus doesn't spread as well as COVID does; it also very rarely causes the severity of disease that COVID does, and so spread in the general population is extremely unlikely. That doesn't mean that we don't need a substantial public health response to control it, but it's not a threat to the whole of public health in the way COVID was."

Meanwhile, the UKHSA advised Britons to contact their sexual health clinic if they have a rash with blisters and have been in close contact with a suspected or confirmed monkeypox case or have been in West or Central Africa in the last 3 weeks.

A large proportion of cases so far have been identified in the gay, bisexual, and men who have sex with other men community. But anyone can get monkeypox if they have had close contact with an infected person. Monkeypox is not normally a sexually transmitted infection, but it can be passed on by direct contact during sex. It can also be spread through touching clothing, bedding, or towels used by someone with the monkeypox rash.

According to the UKHSA, monkeypox does not usually spread easily between people, and the overall risk to the UK population remains low. The disease is usually mild but can cause severe illness in some cases.

Symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches, backache, swollen lymph nodes, chills, and exhaustion. A rash can develop, often beginning on the face, which then spreads to other parts of the body including the genitals.

It comes as the UKHSA yesterday [7 Jun 2022] declared the virus a notifiable disease. It said laboratories must also tell it if the virus is identified in a sample.

Wendi Shepherd, monkeypox incident director at UKHSA, said: "Rapid diagnosis and reporting is the key to interrupting transmission and containing any further spread of monkeypox. This new legislation will support us and our health partners to swiftly identify, treat and control the disease. It also supports us with the swift collection and analysis of data which enables us to detect possible outbreaks of the disease and trace close contacts rapidly, whilst offering vaccinations where appropriate to limit onward transmission."

Professor David Heymann, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, said: "Making monkeypox a notifiable disease suggests a desire to be sure to have reporting from all sectors (public and private) and all parts of the NHS. It suggests that the Government wants to focus surveillance on the entire population -- not only on the risk groups identified so far. This will permit clear identification of all risk groups and help better understand the epidemiology and extent of spread."

Making monkeypox a notifiable disease will also help businesses that could suffer financial losses from the outbreak. The same move was made for COVID before the 1st lockdown. Officials said at the time it would "help companies seek compensation through their insurance policies in the event of any cancellations that they may have to make as a result of the spread of the virus."

Northern Ireland today [8 Jun 2022] followed suit, with the nation's chief medical officer Sir Michael McBride saying health chiefs have been "working closely with trusts and GPs to raise awareness of the disease and this move formalises that arrangement."

The UKHSA says its teams are contacting high-risk contacts of confirmed cases and advising them to self-isolate at home for 3 weeks and avoid contact with children.

Officials said they have linked the outbreak back to "gay bars, saunas and the use of dating apps in the UK and abroad." MailOnline revealed last month [May 2022] that the world's biggest gay dating app Grindr had alerted users of monkeypox symptoms.

Both confirmed cases and close contacts in the UK are being offered the Imvanex vaccine to form a buffer of immune people around a confirmed case to limit the spread of the disease. The strategy, known as ring vaccination, has been used in previous monkeypox outbreaks and is also being carried out in some EU countries The jab is thought to reduce a person's chance of catching monkeypox by up to 85%.

Analysis by the UKHSA last week revealed that more than 60% of domestic infections have been among gay and bisexual men. Almost 9 in 10 were based in the epicentre London and only 2 cases have been women.

Most of the UK's infections -- 87% -- were among people aged 20 to 49. And the majority of UK patients caught the virus in the UK rather than abroad.

Monkeypox, which was first discovered in lab monkeys in the late 1950s, is usually mild but can cause severe illness in some cases. It can kill up to 10% of people it infects. But the milder strain causing the current outbreak kills one in 100 -- similar to when COVID first hit. No monkeypox deaths linked with the ongoing outbreak have yet been reported.

The virus has an incubation period of anywhere up to 21 days, meaning it can take 3 weeks for symptoms to appear. Experts have warned that monkeypox could spread to pets and wildlife and become endemic in Europe.

In Africa, where monkeypox is well established, the virus is often in rodents including squirrels and hedgehogs [reservoir rodents in Africa are suspected but not yet confirmed. - Mod.TY].

The UKHSA is already quarantining pet guinea pigs, rats, and mice of infected people for 3 weeks. Other household pets like cats and dogs should be kept isolated at home but receive regular vet checks to ensure they are not infected.

[Byline: Emily Craig]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED from HealthMap Alerts

******
[3] Netherlands
Date: Tue 7 Jun 2022 16:23 CET
Source: NL Times [abridged, edited]
https://nltimes.nl/2022/06/07/monkeypox-cases-diagnosed-netherlands-doubles-week-54


The monkeypox virus has been diagnosed in 54 people in the Netherlands, an increase of 14 since Thursday [2 Jun 2022]. To date, all of those people diagnosed with the viral infection in the Netherlands are men who engage sexually with other men, the RIVM said on Tuesday [7 Jun 2022]. Last Monday [30 May 2022], the tally was at 26 cases, which indicates the number of confirmed infections has more than doubled in a week.

Some of the infections can be traced back to an outbreak at the Belgian festival, Darklands, a fetish event. Health authorities emphasized that anyone can get monkeypox after close contact with someone who is infected, regardless of gender or sexual orientation.

People born before 1974 and who grew up in the Netherlands may have received a vaccination against smallpox, which was still circulating in the world at the time. That vaccine can also provide protection against monkeypox, according to experts.

Anyone who tests positive for the disease must remain in isolation, meaning the person is not allowed to have contact with others until the symptoms have passed. Close contacts, such as family members and sex partners, are to be quarantined as a precaution.

They can also receive a smallpox vaccination from the GGD to reduce the chances of getting sick themselves.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED from HealthMap Alerts

******
[4] Germany
Date: Fri 10 Jun 2022
Source: Robert Koch Institute (RKI) [in German, trans., edited]
https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/A/Affenpocken/Ausbruch-2022-Situation-Deutschland.html


Cases of monkeypox were first identified in Germany in May 2022. As of 10 Jun 2022, 165 cases of monkeypox from 9 federal states (Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Berlin, Brandenburg, Hamburg, Hesse, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Saxony-Anhalt) have been reported to the RKI. These cases are related to other monkeypox cases that have been reported in various countries outside Africa since May 2022.

What is special about these cases is that those affected had not traveled to African countries where the virus is endemic (West and Central Africa), as they had in the past, and that many transmissions apparently took place in the context of sexual activities (currently especially in men who have had sexual contact with other men). As far as is known, most of those affected do not become seriously ill.

Further cases are to be expected in Germany. According to current knowledge, close contact is required for transmission of the pathogen, so it can currently be assumed that the outbreak can be contained or lesions can be included in the extended differential diagnostic considerations.

According to current knowledge, the RKI assesses the risk to the health of the general population in Germany as low. The RKI continues to monitor the situation very closely and adjusts its assessment to the current state of knowledge.

At https://www.rki.de/affenpocken, the RKI provides various recommendations, including a guide for doctors on suspected clarification and measures to be taken in the case of monkeypox (flowchart), recommendations on how to deal with infected people and contact persons, and information on diagnostics and therapy.

Comprehensive information on monkeypox, including occurrence, routes of infection and diagnostics, can be found in the FAQ on monkeypox (https://www.rki.de/affenpocken-faq).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[A 9 Jun 2020 report stated that Germany's vaccine advisory committee recommends that people over 18 who have been exposed to or are at increased risk of monkeypox infection receive Bavarian Nordic's Imvanex vaccine. Those at increased risk of monkeypox include men who have sex with multiple male partners and infectious disease lab workers, the committee, known as STIKO, said (https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/german-vaccine-authority-recommends-imvanex-adults-risk-monkeypox-2022-06-09/). - Mod.TY]

******
[5] Greece: 1st report
Date: Wed 8 Jun 2022
Source: Reuters [edited]
https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/greece-detects-first-case-monkeypox-infection-2022-06-08/


Greece has detected its 1st case of the rare monkeypox virus infection in a traveler, according to initial tests, the country's national health agency EODY said in a statement on Wednesday [8 Jun 2022].

The patient, who had recently traveled to Portugal, is in hospital and is in a steady condition, EODY said. Samples have been sent for further confirmation tests.

Monkeypox is a rare viral infection similar to human smallpox. Symptoms include fever, headaches and skin rashes.

[Byline: Renee Maltezou, Angeliki Koutantou]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[6] USA: cases by state
Date: Thu 9 Jun 2022 14:00 EDT
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/response/2022/index.html


The US CDC reports cases in the following states:

State / Number of cases
-----------------------
Arizona / 1
California / 8
Colorado / 3
District of Columbia / 2
Florida / 5
Georgia / 1
Hawaii / 2
Illinois / 4
Massachusetts / 1
New York / 11
Pennsylvania / 1
Rhode Island / 1
Texas / 1
Utah / 2
Virginia / 1
Washington / 1

Total confirmed monkeypox/orthopoxvirus cases: 45
- One Florida case is listed here but included in the United Kingdom case counts because the individual was tested while in the UK.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[A table providing a list and frequency of clinical signs and symptoms of monkeypox virus infection of 17 patients in the USA is available at the CDC website: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7123e1.htm. - Mod.TY]

******
[7] Africa: WHO
Date: Wed 8 Jun 2022
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy) News [edited]
https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2022/06/who-director-calls-attention-monkeypox-africa


Today [8 Jun 2022] during a World Health Organization (WHO) briefing on monkeypox, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, PhD, said it's unfortunate the world is only now paying attention to the threat of monkeypox as cases have started appearing in wealthy countries. In the past month, more than 1000 cases in 29 countries outside of West and Central Africa -- where the poxvirus is endemic -- have been confirmed.

"This virus has been circulating and killing in Africa for decades. It's an unfortunate reflection of the world we live in that the international community is only now paying attention to monkeypox because it has appeared in high-income countries," Tedros said. In Africa this year [2022], there have been more than 1400 cases of monkeypox, including 66 deaths. So far, none of the cases outside of Africa have been fatal.

WHO officials today [8 Jun 2022] reiterated that interpersonal close contact, including sexual relations, was the likely means of transmission in non-endemic countries. Most, but not all, monkeypox cases seen in Europe and North America have been in men who have sex with men (MSM).

"Some countries are now beginning to report cases of apparent community transmission, including some cases in women," Tedros said. "The risk of monkeypox becoming established in non-endemic countries is real. WHO is particularly concerned about the risks of this virus for vulnerable groups including children and pregnant women."

Surveillance and contact tracing -- not mass vaccination -- will prevent monkeypox from becoming established in these countries, Tedros said, but countries have to act quickly. He said the WHO will issue new guidance on community protection against monkeypox in the coming days.

Ideally, vaccines should be used, if available in a country, for post-exposure prophylaxis, within 4 days of exposure. The WHO said countries may consider close contacts to be sexual partners, family members in the same household, and healthcare workers.

[Byline: Stephanie Soucheray]

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

******
[8] Vaccine strategy
Date: Tue 7 Jun 2022
Source: Science [edited]
https://www.science.org/content/article/monkeypox-threat-grows-scientists-debate-best-vaccine-strategy


In 1959, German microbiologist Anton Mayr took a strain of vaccinia, a poxvirus used to inoculate against smallpox, and started to grow it in cells taken from chicken embryos. After several years of transferring the strain to fresh cells every few days, the virus had changed so much it could no longer reproduce in most cells from mammals. But it could still produce an immune response that protected against smallpox.

Mayr had set out to study how poxviruses evolve, but by accident he had produced a potentially safer smallpox vaccine. Dubbed Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA) because the original viral strain came from that Turkish city, the vaccine had a short career. "With smallpox eradicated in 1980, it disappeared into the freezer," says Gerd Sutter, a virologist at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, who has studied Mayr's vaccinia strain for decades.

Now, this virus, further weakened and brought to the market by the Danish pharma company Bavarian Nordic, may become key to arresting the largest outbreak of monkeypox ever seen outside Africa, which has already sickened more than 1000 people. It is the only vaccine licensed anywhere for use against monkeypox, although other, riskier smallpox vaccines also appear to offer some protection. The United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and several other countries have already started to "ring" vaccinate, offering it to contacts of identified monkeypox cases, including healthcare workers and sexual partners. "MVA will be very important in this outbreak because it is a nonreplicating vaccine, which means it doesn't have the same side effect profile as some of the other live [virus] vaccines" being considered, says Rosamund Lewis, technical lead on monkeypox at the World Health Organization (WHO).

But what role the vaccine will ultimately play depends on a host of factors: whether those most at risk from infection can be identified and vaccinated, whether the vaccine is as effective as hoped, and whether enough is available to stop the burgeoning outbreak. WHO has so far only backed ring vaccination -- MVA is ideally given within 4 days of an exposure but recommended for up to 14 days -- but some scientists say it's too difficult to reach the specific contacts people had. They advocate broader vaccination campaigns in the population most affected so far: men who have sex with men (MSM).

Hundreds of millions of doses of smallpox vaccine are stored around the world, insurance against a possible release of the dreaded virus by terrorists or in war, and they are known to offer some protection against monkeypox. A study in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) in the 1980s found that household contacts of people sick with monkeypox were 7 times less likely to contract the disease if they had been vaccinated against smallpox. Yet the vast majority of existing smallpox vaccines consist still replicating vaccinia. These can cause rare but life-threatening side effects such as encephalitis or progressive vaccinia, the spread of the vaccine virus to the whole body, to which immunocompromised people are vulnerable.

Although 66 people have already died of monkeypox this year [2022] in African countries, the recent cases in nonendemic countries have mostly been mild. And many contacts of those infected are living with HIV, which could make them more likely to suffer from vaccinia side effects. Given the risks and benefits, "using these vaccines is out of the question," Sutter says.

Bavarian Nordic's nonreplicating vaccine, marketed as Jynneos in the United States and as Imvanex in Europe, sidesteps some of the risk. So does a vaccinia-based vaccine named LC16m8, licensed for smallpox only in Japan, which also appears to cause fewer side effects. "I believe these are the ones that are going to be used [in the new outbreak] because they have a much-enhanced safety profile," says Marion Gruber, who headed the US Food and Drug Administration's vaccine office until October 2021.

Canada and the United States have already licensed MVA for use against monkeypox and Bavarian Nordic is in talks with the European Medicines Agency (EMA). "I really hope that in a matter of 1 or 2 months from now, this can be approved" in Europe, says EMA's Marco Cavaleri.

The United Kingdom has been using MVA "off-label" for a few years to vaccinate contacts of imported monkeypox cases. WHO's Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization is set to release guidance in the next days that will back MVA, but it will also recommend using earlier vaccines in certain scenarios. Still, Cavaleri says, "If [MVA] is available, clearly that will be the vaccine to start."

Exactly how much is available remains murky. "Countries have been reluctant over the past couple of decades to share that information in detail with WHO but WHO is now reaching out to all of them again," Lewis says. The United States, which supported development of MVA, likely has the biggest supply. A federal spokesperson says the Strategic National Stockpile has 36 000 doses, that another 36 000 doses will be delivered "in the near future," and that the company is storing bulk material for millions more US-reserved doses. A Bavarian Nordic spokesperson says many other countries had ordered its MVA vaccine in the past weeks and the company was trying to send smaller batches to countries "so they can start to vaccinate sooner rather than later."

How broadly to roll out MVA, or any vaccine, remains the key debate. Ring vaccination among MSM can be challenging given the stigma faced by that group in many cultures and the nature of the contacts. A paper published last week in Eurosurveillance noted that in the United Kingdom, many of those infected reported sexual contacts with people whose details they either did not know or did not want to share.

The Canadian province of Quebec has already extended vaccinations from direct contacts of monkeypox cases to any men who have had more than 2 male sexual partners in the past 14 days. Another way to tackle the problem, says Yale School of Public Health epidemiologist Gregg Gonsalves, "would be to offer it to individuals who have attended social events in which close contact with someone infected was possible, but this would increase the numbers of those being recruited for vaccination even further." Germany is also likely to offer the vaccine more broadly, though it will not quickly have enough vaccine available for all MSM, says Leif Erik Sander, an infectious disease expert at the Charité University Hospital in Berlin.

Even where contacts of infected cases were identified, uptake has been low. The same UK study reported that 169 out of 245 healthcare workers who had been offered MVA had taken it, but only 15 out of 107 contacts in other groups. "It's very challenging to target high-risk groups while balancing stigma and encouraging uptake of the vaccines," says Boghuma Titanji, a virologist at Emory University. The politicization of vaccines during COVID-19 has increased the barriers, she adds.

How well MVA really protects humans from monkeypox is uncertain. The license for MVA in Canada and the United States is based on animal studies, where it was shown to protect macaques and prairie dogs, plus data in humans showing a strong antibody response. A pair of DRC studies vaccinated 1600 health care workers with one of 2 MVA formulations and found no monkeypox cases in each 2-year study period. But there were no control groups, and one vaccinated healthcare worker did get monkeypox half a year later. "The truth is, we don't know the efficacy of any of these monkeypox vaccines," says Ira Longini, a biostatistician at the University of Florida who is advising WHO.

That is why WHO has urged countries that deploy monkeypox vaccine to study how well it works and how best to use it. "If we want to contain these outbreaks and learn something about the efficacy of these vaccines, it's going to have to be a concerted effort with protocols and organized properly," Longini says. One question is whether a single dose of the vaccine, which is normally given as 2 doses 4 weeks apart, may suffice. That could encourage more uptake and stretch supplies.

The question of vaccine equity looms large, too. Titanji notes that the hopes for MVA are based partly on the DRC data. "It's almost a moral obligation to make sure that, if these vaccines are being utilized elsewhere now, the people on whom the data was generated, who have been dealing with monkeypox for 50 years, should have access to it as well."

[Byline: Kai Kupferschmidt]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED
and
Mary Marshall

[An 8 Jun 2022 report states that, as monkeypox cases surpass 1000 across 29 non-endemic countries, governments are scrambling for doses of the Bavarian Nordic's Imvane vaccine, which until recently was predominantly stockpiled in the USA and Canada in case of a health emergency.

"Media reports from across Europe reveal contracts for tens of thousands of doses have recently been signed in Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the UK. Some of these countries are already administering the vaccine off-label to close contacts of confirmed cases. And many more orders are expected.

"'People are really desperate to get hold of Imvanex, Jynneos or Imvamune because of the increased safety over other vaccines,' said Paul Chaplin, chief executive officer at Bavarian Nordic, during a conference call on Tuesday [7 Jun 2022].

"Chaplin pointed out that many people cannot receive the other stockpiled smallpox vaccine, known as ACAM2000, due to the risk of rare but severe side effects, which include heart inflammation and an extensive rash that can cause fatal organ damage. (People with immunity against one of the orthopoxviruses, which includes smallpox and monkeypox, are often protected against other viruses in the family.)" (https://www.politico.eu/article/orders-mount-danmark-biotech-monkeypox-jab-imvanex-jynneos-imvamune/).

Clearly, international coordination will be necessary to assure that the distribution of the vaccine is fair and timely. - Mod.TY]

******
[9] Messaging to MSM
Date: Thu 9 Jun 2022
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy) News [edited]
https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2022/06/experts-aim-thread-needle-monkeypox-messaging-msm


Yesterday [8 Jun 2022] the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released new guidance called "Social gatherings, safer sex, and monkeypox," highlighting the risks of transmission in higher-risk situations.

"Enclosed spaces, such as back rooms, saunas, or sex clubs, where there is minimal or no clothing and where intimate sexual contact occurs, have a higher likelihood of spreading monkeypox," the guidance reads. "A rave, party, or club where there is minimal clothing and where there is direct, personal, often skin-to-skin contact, has some risk. Avoid any rashes or sores you see on others and consider minimizing skin-to-skin contact when possible."

While it is still unknown if monkeypox can be transmitted through semen or vaginal fluids, the presenting genital rash suggests intimate contact is a key to transmission. The CDC's site is also clear that the question of asymptomatic transmission is still unknown.

Because most, but not all, cases of monkeypox in the current outbreak have been in men who have sex with men (MSM), public health agencies face their 1st significant challenge in the post-COVID era: How to communicate risk to MSM without stigmatizing?

Jeff Duchin, MD, health officer for Public Health Seattle-King County, said the CDC is doing a good job toeing the line between alerting MSM groups about the real risks of monkeypox and avoiding stigmatization. Duchin said in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, public health officials have been extremely careful to admit what they don't know about a virus or to attempt to predict how it will act.

"COVID-19 has shown the importance of acknowledging areas of uncertainty when describing what is known, and in making predictions about, newly emerging pathogens," Duchin said. "Monkeypox, on the other hand, is not newly discovered, and there is considerable existing knowledge with it, but it's probably good to keep an open mind regarding the extent to which the current outbreak may indicate differences in how the virus behaves compared to the past."

Though monkeypox was first described in humans in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1970, infection outside of West and Central Africa has been extremely rare until last month [May 2022]. And cases in endemic countries in Africa are usually linked to eating contaminated bushmeat, or in households. The sexual transmission component of the current outbreak is novel.

Duchin said in Seattle one confirmed case has been closely monitored, with close contacts under surveillance. So far, monkeypox in the area has been limited to a single resident. In King County, the information website on monkeypox is called "Monkeypox in men who have sex with men," which Duchin said was a deliberate choice. "We don't let people hold us back from warning people, and providing them with the best information to protect their health," Duchin said. "Right from the get go, we have been clear about the risk to MSM."

Being clear about that risk is one of the most important messages about monkeypox, according to New Jersey-based risk communication expert Peter Sandman, PhD. "In the current outbreak, most patients so far are catching it from MSM. But it will almost inevitably spread from MSM, to others who have close contact (especially sexual contact) with MSM, to still others who have close contact (especially sexual contact) with those others," Sandman said in an email.

"I would urge risk communicators to say all this -- and I'd specifically urge them not to let fear of stigmatization deter them from doing so. Fear of stigmatization is an unacceptable reason to withhold or even to soft-pedal this information.

"Stigmatization of MSM is still a real social evil -- but candid monkeypox risk communication won't exacerbate that evil, and pussyfooting won't ameliorate that evil. I think what's masquerading as a fear of stigmatization is really a fear of being accused of stigmatization -- and that's an unacceptable reason for suppressing or downplaying important health information."

The CDC said the United States now has 40 cases of monkeypox. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) today [9 Jun 2022] posted an epidemiological update on monkeypox, citing the global total as 1176 confirmed cases from 24 countries as of 8 Jun 2022.

The ECDC said, "The EU outbreak sequences are a part of a distinct cluster from 2022 within the West African clade. There are two 2022 sequences from the US that are not part of this cluster, but still belong to the West African clade."

The outbreak is concentrated in Europe, where 704 cases have been reported in 18 countries, mainly in the United Kingdom, Spain, and Portugal. So far there have been no deaths, and most cases are occurring in young MSM.

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall

[In addition to transmission by close physical contact, a 7 Jun 2022 report indicates that the virus can be airborne, at least over short distances. While airborne transmission is only a small factor in the overall spread, experts said in interviews, there are no firm estimates regarding how much it contributes (https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/07/health/monkeypox-masks-cdc.html). - Mod.TY]

******
[10] Infection consequences
Date: Thu 9 Jun 2022 09:37 EDT
Source: Vox [edited]
https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2022/6/9/23160055/monkeypox-outbreak-immunocompromised-pregnant-hiv


As the number of global monkeypox cases rises above 1300, we're getting a clearer picture of how the infection is playing out for individuals. For the most part, it's been pretty manageable: Affected people get clusters of small, painful bumps or blisters -- often in the genital area after sexual contact -- which are accompanied by fever and lymph node swelling. Often, the rash spreads to the arms, legs, and face.

While monkeypox is known to leave behind scarring that can cause cosmetic problems, the less virulent West African version of the virus that is currently circulating is rarely lethal. As of 2 Jun [2022], none of the people involved in the current outbreak have died, in countries where the disease is not endemic.

What's more, it's relatively easy to avoid an infection. The virus is generally spread through contact with a monkeypox sore, so not touching others' rashes is a solid prevention strategy.

With monkeypox infections preventable and not particularly deadly, it might be easy to brush off the threat of this pathogen. But we shouldn't, and for an important reason: These infections can kill.

As COVID-19 made clear, one person's mild infection can be another person's death sentence. A minority of people are more at risk due to pre-existing conditions -- and as the outbreak grows, so does the likelihood that monkeypox will find more vulnerable individuals. That makes it a pathogen worth containing -- and worth having and sharing good treatments for. It also makes it worth figuring out who is most likely to get hurt the most, as the outbreak continues to spread.

The risk of monkeypox complications is higher for people who are immunocompromised, pregnant, or have certain skin conditions.

Our best understanding of the range of problems monkeypox can cause comes from Nigeria, where healthcare providers have identified more than 550 cases of monkeypox since an outbreak erupted there in 2017.

The skin rash most people get due to monkeypox infection can be exquisitely painful, in some cases requiring hospitalization just to control the discomfort the bumps and blisters can cause. But what makes monkeypox dangerous is when the virus disseminates to organ systems beyond the skin, said Andrea McCollum, an epidemiologist at the Center for Disease Control's poxvirus and rabies branch.

In the cases where monkeypox infection led to death, patients suffered from severe infections of the brain, the bloodstream, or the lungs. These complications may have resulted from direct viral effects on organs or from bacterial infections that the virus' inflammatory effects helped facilitate, often called "secondary" infections.

These complications are most likely among people with severe immunosuppression, according to Dimie Ogoina, an infectious diseases physician at Niger Delta University in Bayelsa, Nigeria, and lead author of a report describing outcomes among Nigerian patients hospitalized between 2017 and 2018.

Since that outbreak in Nigeria began, 9 people have died of monkeypox infections, he explained in an email. Of those people, 4 who died were living with uncontrolled HIV infection, Ogoina said, while one was a newborn and another had underlying kidney disease and was taking immunosuppressive medications. Additionally, one pregnant woman with monkeypox had a spontaneous miscarriage of her pregnancy at 26 weeks of gestation.

It's not entirely clear why certain immunocompromised states put people at increased risk for monkeypox complications, said Stuart Isaacs, a virologist at the University of Pennsylvania who studies poxviruses, the family that includes monkeypox virus.

Researchers have tried to clarify the exact types of immunocompromised states that raise poxvirus risks using animal models. Those experiments have shown that CD4 T cells (which are depleted by untreated HIV infections) and antibody-producing B cells play a leading role in controlling the initial infection. However, there's currently little human data to go on, said Brett Petersen, an internist and medical epidemiologist at the CDC.

For now, the agency's treatment recommendations currently suggest that people with a broad range of immunocompromising conditions are at risk for severe disease (including HIV, a variety of cancers, organ transplants, certain stem cell transplants, and certain autoimmune diseases), as are children below the age of 8.

Also at higher risk are people with pre-existing skin conditions like eczema (i.e., atopic dermatitis), said McCollum, possibly because people spread infection from one body site to another when scratching, and pregnant people, who have a higher likelihood of spreading the virus to their pregnancies and potentially causing miscarriage.

Risk factors for monkeypox infection overlap with risk factors for a key immunocompromised state: uncontrolled HIV.

In the current global outbreak, monkeypox seems to be spreading largely through the kind of close contact that happens during sex. The same kinds of contact that put people at risk for monkeypox also puts them at risk for uncontrolled HIV infections. And so that raises the concern that people with uncontrolled HIV are at highest risk, not only for getting infected with monkeypox but also for suffering its worst consequences.

"This is the thing that worries me the most," said Gregg Gonsalves, an epidemiologist at Yale University's School of Public Health and an HIV and global health activist. On average, 13% of Americans with HIV are unaware of their diagnosis and not on treatment, but that proportion is as high as 20% in some Southern states and higher still in several of the Plains and Western states. "If there's a fifth of the HIV-positive community that doesn't know their status, it means they're at risk," said Gonsalves.

A disease spread during sex can be contained if people avoid sexual contact when they're sick, or rigorously use precautions like condoms or dental dams. And while many sexually active people do use these precautions, people whose sexual activity is stigmatized -- like closeted gay or bisexual men -- are less likely to do so. For these groups, homophobia and other stigmas often interfere with getting tested and seeking care for sexually transmitted infections, including HIV.

That means the same marginalized people who are at higher risk for untreated HIV are at higher risk for monkeypox infections -- and for severe consequences of both. In many parts of the US, homophobia disproportionately prevents Black men from getting lifesaving HIV treatment -- a major contributor to higher rates of HIV infections and deaths among Black Americans.

The more the outbreak spreads, the more likely that, eventually, it will reach higher numbers of immunocompromised people, where it could lead to terrible consequences. That should move us to urgent action regardless of where the spread is taking place, Ogoina said.

"If global action is not taken to better understand the virus and disease everywhere and to develop innovative countermeasures to address the challenge of monkeypox everywhere," wrote Ogoina, there's a serious risk. Then we could see big changes in who the virus infects and how much havoc it wreaks.

[Byline: Keren Landman]

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall

[Interestingly, the 1st UK monkeypox patient to go public with his diagnosis has said he had none of the tell-tale pustules linked the disease. He said he returned to the UK from Dubai and was urged to get checked after showing flu-like symptoms and back pain (https://au.news.yahoo.com/uk-monkeypox-patient-symptoms-125136089.html). The absence of monkeypox clinical signs of pustules and crusts in this case, if common, raises the possibility of undiagnosed or inapparent infections could be circulating unrecognized. The West African clade of monkeypox virus, the one currently circulating, is reported to have a case fatality rate of 1%, yet with over 1000 cases in the current outbreak, no deaths have been reported. - Mod.TY]
See Also
Monkeypox update (10) 20220607.8703721
Monkeypox update (09) 20220604.8703670
Monkeypox update (08) 20220531.8703603
Monkeypox update (07) 20220531.8703592
Monkeypox update (06) 20220530.8703569
Monkeypox update (05) 20220527.8703493
Monkeypox update (04) 20220526.8703477
Monkeypox update (03) 20220526.8703465
Monkeypox update (02) 20220524.8703425
Monkeypox update (01) 20220521.8703393
Monkeypox - North America: USA (MA) 20220519.8703351
Monkeypox - Europe: Portugal, Spain, UK 20220519.8703349
Monkeypox - UK (03): local transmission 20220518.8703317
Monkeypox - UK (02): ex Nigeria 20220515.8703269
Monkeypox - UK: (England) ex Nigeria 20220508.8703123
.................................................sb/lxl/ty/mj/rd/lxl
</body>
