<header id=013068>
Published Date: 2014-06-22 08:32:09 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis C - Africa
Archive Number: 20140622.2556755
</header>
<body id=013068>
HEPATITIS C - AFRICA
********************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 20 Jun 2014
Source: Guardian Liberty Voice [edited]
http://guardianlv.com/2014/06/hepatitis-c-epidemic-in-africa


The epidemic levels of hepatitis C virus (HCV) prevalence in Africa are considered one of the most serious health challenges facing African nations by the World Health Organization (WHO). According to Dr Peter Beyer, Essential Medicines Advisor at WHO, the greatest challenges to fighting HCV in Africa are drug access and affordability. HCV is 4 times more contagious than HIV and, along with hepatitis B, poses substantial public health risk because chronic infection can lead to liver cirrhosis and liver cancer, the most common cause of liver-related deaths in Africa.

Hepatitis C is a bloodborne virus that is transmitted through exposure to previously contaminated blood. In remote hospitals and care stations, inadequately sterilized syringes and needles and the sharing of injection equipment lead often to HCV infections. Injected drug use outside hospital settings, contaminated body piercing and tattooing needles have also contributed to the epidemic. HCV can be transmitted sexually, though rarely, but not through breast milk, water, food, or by hugging and kissing. Once infected, the person can go up to 30 years without noticing symptoms, a fact which makes combating its spread difficult in remote areas. Most often, patients arrive at hospitals and care stations with acute symptoms when treatment options are most limited.

According to a 2013 study, researchers found that Africa had the highest prevalence rate of HCV in the world. According to their estimates, 1 in 20 Africans is infected with HCV, nearly 32 million people. The highest prevalence of infection among African nations, and worldwide, is in Egypt where 5 million people carry the virus. By comparison, Europe has the lowest prevalence rate of 1.03 percent, followed by the Americas at 1.7 percent. It is estimated that close to 170 million people carry the hepatitis C virus worldwide, nearly 3 percent of the world's population.

The high HCV infection rate in Egypt has long been a concern for Egyptian health organizations. The high prevalence rate of HCV in Egypt is due to unsanitary treatment campaigns for epidemic levels of waterborne schistosomiasis that infected Egyptians in the 1960s and 70s. Vaccine treatments were carried out on millions of people and involved multiple injections, often using disposable syringes, which were not properly sanitized. As a result, deaths from liver disease are expected to rise significantly in the next 20 years in Egypt from chronic HCV infections.

Central African nations also suffer some of the highest HCV infection rates in Africa. The African nations of Cameroon and Burundi, with combined populations of over 30 million people, have infection rates of between 11 and 13 percent of the population. Combating infectious diseases in remote villages has proved difficult for international health organizations where screening and treatment options are limited. The WHO plans to help combat the spread of HCV by educating people on the disease, its risks and its prevention. In April 2014, the WHO updated its HCV treatment guidelines which it hopes to disseminate to rural areas in Africa and elsewhere.

Gilead Sciences and Janssen Therapeutics, whose HCV medications Sovaldi and Olysio were approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in December 2013, recently captured news headlines with the high cost of treatment. With the highest prevalence of HCV in the world, Egypt is expected to be hit hardest by its cost. Given the nature of the hepatitis C epidemic in Africa, international health organizations would welcome an HCV treatment with a 90 percent success rate, but its high cost is certain to limit its effectiveness.

[Byline: Steve Killings]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[For more information on the Hepatitis C outbreak related to the mass treatment program against schistosomiasis, see the prior ProMED-mail posts referenced below. In a 2013 review of Hepatitic C (HCV), Karoney and Silka did a review of the current available literature on HCV in Africa -- and found a paucity of information. Their abstract states: ".....Africa has the highest WHO estimated regional HCV prevalence (5.3 percent). Egypt has the highest prevalence (17.5 percent) of HCV in the world. Genotypes commonly found in Africa are 1, 4 and 5. Genotype 3 is found in Egypt and parts of Central Africa. Blood transfusion is a major means of acquisition of HCV infection. While treatment with peginterferon and ribavirin is recommended for patients with chronic HCV, no data were found on their use in Africa. Neither were there any data on definitive management (liver transplantation) for those with end stage disease. Data on HCV infection in Africa are scarce. This suggests that hepatitis C is still a neglected disease in many countries. Limited data exist in literature on HCV in Africa." (Karoney MJ, Siika AM. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in Africa: a review.
The Pan African Medical Journal. 2013;14:44, available at http://www.panafrican-med-journal.com/content/article/14/44/full/).

For those who are interested, an excellent review of the epidemiology of HCV in the Eastern Mediterranean region countries of WHO can be found in a 2009 Technical paper -- "The growing threats of hepatitis B and C in the Eastern Mediterranean Region: a call for action" available at http://applications.emro.who.int/docs/EM_RC56_3_en.pdf?ua=1. The paper mentions the high prevalence in Egypt related to the schistosomiasis treatment campaigns that were conducted from the 1930s to the late 1970s, associated with the use of injectables with unsafe injection techniques. Further epidemiologic studies demonstrated a high prevalence of HCV in children born after the campaigns suggesting continued transmission through unsafe injection techniques. The data available in the region suggests that the majority of HCV transmission in the EMRO region does occur in the health care setting associated with unsafe injection techniques. A map showing the prevalence of HCV by country in the region can be found on page 6 of the position paper. - Mod.MPP]

[The following are extracted from the summary of the April 2014 WHO recommendations regarding hepatitis C (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs164/en/):

Treatment
---------
Hepatitis C does not always require treatment as the immune response in some people will clear the infection. When treatment is necessary, the goal of hepatitis C treatment is cure. The cure rate depends on several factors including the strain of the virus and the type of treatment given. Careful screening is necessary before starting the treatment to determine the most appropriate approach for the patient.

The current standard treatment for hepatitis C is combination antiviral therapy with interferon and ribavirin, which are effective against all the genotypes of hepatitis viruses (pan-genotypic). Unfortunately, interferon is not widely available globally and it is poorly tolerated in some patients. This means that management of the treatment is complex, and many patients do not finish their treatment. Despite these limitations, interferon and ribavirin treatment can be life-saving.

Scientific advances have led to the development of new antiviral drugs for hepatitis C, which are much more effective, safer, and better-tolerated than existing therapies. These therapies, known as oral directly acting antiviral agent (DAAs) therapies simplify hepatitis C treatment by significantly decreasing monitoring requirements and by increasing cure rates. Although the production cost of DAAs is low, the initial prices set by companies are very high and likely to make access to these drugs difficult even in high-income countries.

Much needs to be done to ensure that these advances lead to greater access to treatment globally.

WHO response
------------
WHO is working in the following areas to prevent and control viral hepatitis:
- raising awareness, promoting partnerships and mobilizing resources;
- formulating evidence-based policy and data for action;
- preventing transmission; and
- executing screening, care, and treatment.

WHO also organizes World Hepatitis Day on 28 July every year to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis.

Prevention
----------
Primary prevention
------------------
There is no vaccine for hepatitis C, therefore prevention of HCV infection depends upon reducing the risk of exposure to the virus in healthcare settings, in higher risk populations, for example, people who inject drugs, and through sexual contact.

The following list provides a limited example of primary prevention interventions recommended by WHO:
- hand hygiene: including surgical hand preparation, hand washing, and use of gloves;
- safe handling and disposal of sharps and waste;
- safe cleaning of equipment;
- testing of donated blood;
- improved access to safe blood; and
- training of health personnel.

Secondary and tertiary prevention
---------------------------------
For people infected with the hepatitis C virus, WHO recommends:
- education and counselling on options for care and treatment;
- immunization with the hepatitis A and B vaccines to prevent coinfection from these hepatitis viruses to protect their liver;
early and appropriate medical management including antiviral therapy if appropriate; and
- regular monitoring for early diagnosis of chronic liver disease.
Screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection

WHO is launching new guidelines for the screening, care, and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection in April 2014.

These are the 1st guidelines dealing with hepatitis C treatment produced by WHO and complement existing guidance on the prevention of transmission of bloodborne viruses, including HCV.

They are intended for policy-makers, government officials, and others working in low- and middle-income countries who are developing programmes for the screening, care, and treatment of persons with HCV infection. These guidelines will help expand of treatment services to patients with HCV infection, as they provide key recommendations in these areas and discuss considerations for implementation.

Summary of key recommendations
------------------------------
Recommendations on screening for HCV infection
----------------------------------------------
1. Screening to identify persons with HCV infection
It is recommended that HCV serology testing be offered to individuals who are part of a population with high HCV prevalence or who have a history of HCV risk exposure/behaviour (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).

2. When to confirm the diagnosis of chronic HCV infection
It is suggested that nucleic acid testing (NAT) for the detection of HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA) be performed directly following a positive HCV serological test to establish the diagnosis of chronic HCV infection, in addition to NAT for HCV RNA as part of the assessment for starting treatment for HCV infection (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).

Recommendations on care of people infected with HCV
---------------------------------------------------
3. Screening for alcohol use and counselling to reduce moderate and high levels of alcohol intake
An alcohol intake assessment is recommended for all persons with HCV infection followed by the offer of a behavioural alcohol reduction intervention for persons with moderate-to-high alcohol intake (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).

4. Assessing degree of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis
In resource-limited settings, it is suggested that the aminotransferase/platelet ratio index (APRI) or FIB4 tests be used for the assessment of hepatic fibrosis rather than other non-invasive tests that require more resources such as elastography or Fibrotest (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).

Recommendations on treatment of HCV infection
---------------------------------------------
5. Assessing for HCV treatment
All adults and children with chronic HCV infection, including people who inject drugs, should be assessed for antiviral treatment (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).

6. Treatment with pegylated interferon and ribavirin
Pegylated interferon in combination with ribavirin is recommended for the treatment of chronic HCV infection rather than standard non-pegylated interferon with ribavirin. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).

7. Treatment with telaprevir or boceprevir [Incivek and Victrelis, protease inhibitors]
Treatment with the direct-acting antivirals telaprevir or boceprevir, given in combination with pegylated interferon and ribavirin, is suggested for genotype 1 chronic HCV infection rather than pegylated interferon and ribavirin alone (conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).

8. Treatment with sofosbuvir [Solvaldi, RNA polymerase inhibitor]
Sofosbuvir, given in combination with ribavirin with or without pegylated interferon (depending on the HCV genotype), is recommended in genotypes 1, 2, 3 and 4 HCV infection rather than pegylated interferon and ribavirin alone, or no treatment for persons who cannot tolerate interferon (strong recommendation, high quality of evidence).

9. Treatment with simeprevir [Olysio, protease inhibitor]
Simeprevir, given in combination with pegylated interferon and ribavirin, is recommended for persons with genotype 1b HCV infection and for persons with genotype 1a HCV infection without the Q80K polymorphism rather than pegylated interferon and ribavirin alone (strong recommendation, high quality of evidence).

Note: Recommendations 8 and 9 were made without taking resource use into consideration, as pricing information was not available for any country other than the United States at the time this recommendation was formulated.
- Mod.LL]
See Also
2013
----
Hepatitis C - Egypt (02): incidence & prevalence 20131220.2128171
Hepatitis C - Egypt: silent epidemic 20131218.2123499
Hepatitis C - Tunisia: National Cancer Centre, RFI 20130926.1970081
2010
----
Hepatitis C - Egypt 20101109.4070
2007
----
Hepatitis C - Egypt 20070207.0487
2000
-----
Hepatitis C, schistosomiasis treatment linked - Egypt 20000312.0330
.................................................sb/ll/mj/mpp
</body>
