<header id=045716>
Published Date: 2018-06-03 14:48:55 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ebola update (25): Congo DR, case update, intl. travel screening
Archive Number: 20180603.5836552
</header>
<body id=045716>
EBOLA UPDATE (25): DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, CASE UPDATE, INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL SCREENING
************************************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Case update
- Epidemiological situation 3 Jun 2018, DRC Ministry of Health

[2] International traveler screening preparations
- U.S. White House response
- Terrifying Lessons of a Pandemic Simulation
- Shortcomings of Nigeria's airport screening strategy for Ebola

******
[1] Case update
- 3 Jun 2018. Epidemiological situation 2 Jun 2018, DRC Ministry of Health
[in French, machine trans. edited] https://us13.campaign-archive.com/?u=89e5755d2cca4840b1af93176&id=9974bb29cd

The epidemiological situation of Ebola virus disease dated 2 Jun 2018:

A total of 53 cases of haemorrhagic fever were reported in the region, including 37 confirmed, 13 probable and 3 suspected.
- 1 new suspicious case in Iboko
- 5 samples were negative, 2 in Bikoro, 1 in Iboko and 2 in Wangata
- No new cases confirmed today [2 Jun 2018]
- No new deaths reported today

News from the Ebola response

Vaccination
- Since the launch of the vaccination on 21 May 2018, 1112 people have been vaccinated, including 567 in Mbandaka, 269 in Bikoro and 276 in Iboko.
- The vaccination belt in Mbandaka has been completed. All target persons for vaccination in Mbandaka, namely health professionals, contacts of confirmed cases and contacts of contacts, were vaccinated.
Sensitization
- This Sat 2 Jun 2018, the Ministry of Health, through its Provincial Division of Health of Kinshasa with the support of the WHO, organized a day of sensitization with 50 community relays in the health zone of the N'sele and that of Maluku, in Kinshasa.
- These 2 sites are the main risk areas in the city of Kinshasa because of the different ports they contain and Ndjili airport, which receive many travelers making shuttles between the province of Kinshasa and the province of Equateur, currently affected by the Ebola outbreak.
- Populations living in these areas have been sensitized on preventative measures against Ebola, such as frequent washing of hands with soap and water or ashes. Residents were also invited to visit the nearest health center as soon as possible in case of illness.
- This awareness-raising day saw the participation of several notables from these areas, notably the neighborhood leaders, the executives of the National Intelligence Agency and the General Directorate of Migration, the chiefs of the ports, and the provincial commissioners.

******
[2] International traveler screening preparations
- 1 Jun 2018. Trump Administration Supports Response to Ebola Outbreak in Congo
[U.S. White House announcement, edited] https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/trump-administration-supports-response-ebola-outbreak-congo/
[Authors Andrea Hall and Dr. Luciana Borio are overseeing U.S. response efforts for the National Security Council]

Currently, CDC assesses that the threat to the homeland from Ebola remains low. The CDC is providing Ebola-awareness training to Department of Homeland Security personnel to help protect our air, land, and sea borders. To further decrease the risk of potential regional spread of the disease in Central Africa, the CDC is offering technical assistance for the implementation of border-screening measures at key airports and ports in the DRC and surrounding countries. The CDC is also reviewing national response plans in neighboring countries to ensure they are prepared in the event the outbreak spreads.

The United States remains committed to aiding our partners on the ground in the DRC to contain this outbreak and to protecting the American people from a potential health crisis. These efforts are inherently linked. Global health security is, at its core, national security and homeland security. The partnerships we have developed in health security are key to ensuring that we have the resilience and capacity to end these outbreaks where they start.

- 1 Jun 2018. The Terrifying Lessons of a Pandemic Simulation
[The New Yorker, edited] https://www.newyorker.com/science/elements/the-terrifying-lessons-of-a-pandemic-simulation [Byline: Nicola Twilley]

I was in the ballroom of the Mandarin Oriental in Washington, D.C., when the worst pandemic since the 1918 Spanish flu broke out. On cable news, there were reports of 400 confirmed cases, mostly clustered in Frankfurt, Germany, but with infected individuals reported as far afield as Tokyo, Kabul, and Caracas. Brow furrowed, eyes widened, the anchorwoman's tone was urgent as she described the spread of a new type of parainfluenza virus, called Clade X. Transmitted through inhalation, it left the infected contagious but otherwise unaffected for up to week before killing more than 10 per cent of its victims.
In the ballroom with me, seated around a U-shaped table under glittering chandeliers, were 10 senior political figures, an ad-hoc working group convened at the President's request. The situation looked bad. At Ramstein Air Base, in southwest Germany, 3 U.S. service members were critically ill, and 3 infected Venezuelans warned that the outbreak there was much worse than authorities were admitting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a vaccine would likely take more than a year to develop. Meanwhile, Australia, China, and South Africa had already imposed travel restrictions on flights from Germany and Venezuela. A bipartisan group of senators was calling for a similar travel ban; a recent poll had suggested that 65 per cent of the public supported them. "What should our priorities be?" the national-security adviser asked.
The room was divided. The health experts at the table warned against closing the borders. "This is an opportunity to do something that will achieve nothing except for diverting resources from real problems," the Secretary of Homeland Security said. The director of the C.D.C. noted that disrupting global supply chains was a terrible idea, given that most personal protective equipment is imported from overseas. The Secretary of Defense was not convinced. "Look, I'm not talking about going out with our hands waving and our hair on fire," he said. "But if the President is seen as not taking vigorous action, they're going to start firing from the Hill."
Fortunately -- and, as you might have guessed by now -- this was a fictional outbreak. "Clade X" was a daylong pandemic simulation held by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, in May 2018. The C.D.C. director was being played by a former holder of that job, the Secretary of Defense was the former Republican senator Jim Talent, and the Secretary of Homeland Security was played by Tara O'Toole, a former Under-Secretary in that department. Clade X turned out to be an engineered bioweapon, combining the virulence of Nipah virus with parainfluenza's ease of transmission. It had been intentionally released by A Brighter Dawn, a fictitious group modelled on the Japanese doomsday cult Aum Shinrikyo, which carried out the sarin-gas attacks in the Tokyo subway system, in 1995. A Brighter Dawn's stated goal was to reduce the world's population to pre-industrial levels. By the end of the day, which represented 20 months in the simulation, they had managed to kill a perfectly respectable 150 million people. "America was just wiped out," Talent said, before heading to a post-event cocktail reception.
This is the 3rd major pandemic exercise that the Center for Health Security has run. The 1st, called Dark Winter, was held in 2001 and simulated a smallpox attack on Oklahoma. Its timing, just a few months before 9/11, made its terrifying outcome -- the near-complete breakdown of government and civil society -- deeply resonant. Dark Winter is credited, in part, with spurring George W. Bush to pass Directive 51, a largely classified plan to insure the continuity of government in the event of a "catastrophic emergency."
"I would say there has been enormous progress in our preparedness since then," Tom Inglesby, the center's director, who played the national-security adviser in Clade X, told me. These advances include new preparedness programs and offices at the C.D.C. and the Department of Health and Human Services; national stockpiling of vaccines and medications; and, at the international level, investments in emergency financing and infectious-disease infrastructure.
According to an article that appeared last year [2017] in the British Medical Journal, however, the world remains "grossly underprepared." Philanthropist-in-chief Bill Gates drew on models developed by the Institute for Disease Modeling, a venture founded by his former Microsoft colleague Nathan Myhrvold, to warn that, at our current state of readiness, roughly 33 million people would die within the 1st 6 months of a global pandemic similar to the 1918 flu.
"Even with the progress that's been made, there are a lot of serious vulnerabilities," Inglesby told me. "The reason we wanted to do this now is because there are new leaders, and there are still large issues that have not been resolved." Some of these issues emerged during the Ebola crisis of 2014, when the United States came very close to shutting down air travel from the West African countries where the disease had broken out. Such a ban would have been in violation of the World Health Organization's International Health Regulations, to which the U.S. is a signatory; it also, in the opinion of most health professionals, would be both ineffective and counterproductive. "To contain a nasty outbreak like that, you need to move people; you need to move assets; you need labs, equipment, supplies, medicine, food all coming into West Africa," Inglesby explained.
But, while scientific opinion on the wisdom of travel bans is established, political and popular instinct lags behind, and it was here that the value of Clade X became apparent. As the experts at the table discussed the issue, it was clear that even those who initially leaned toward a ban, such as Talent, were perfectly willing to follow expert advice; they were just extremely sensitive to the pressures of public perception. Telling the average American that a travel ban wouldn't work "is not going to wash," Talent said. "This needs to be communicated in terms of their health, that a travel ban will detract from our ability to protect their health." None of the health professionals at the table had thought to frame their opposition to the ban this way, which left the politicians without the rhetoric they needed to reassure their constituents.
Many of the day's surprises involved the triumph of these kinds of intangible considerations over rational decision-making. Presented with a scenario in which limited supplies of the vaccine were going to be given to essential workers, including members of Congress and business leaders, rather than children and pregnant women, the table revolted. As acting Attorney General Jamie Gorelick put it, the correct advice may well be to put your own facemask on 1st before helping others, but leaving babies unprotected is not an option. Meanwhile, faced with a request for military support from Jordan, whose government, weakened by the outbreak, was under siege from terrorist groups, the group was unanimous in agreeing that the United States must continue to support its allies in the Middle East, despite the medical risk and the fact that 80 per cent of Americans thought that the mission was a bad idea. "A number of the players, a number of times, said the equivalent of 'We can't do this; it's not consistent with American values,'" Inglesby said. "When you're having a public-health debate about quarantine, say, or resource allocation, you don't always go to that level."
Some of the day's dilemmas revealed vulnerabilities that are hardwired into the American system. Some private hospitals, for instance, turned away Clade X patients in order to protect their shareholders. (By the end of the simulation, American health care had been forcibly nationalized.) Governors enacted state-level quarantines and border cordons. "In a serious outbreak, there will be federalism issues," Inglesby said. "They may be manageable. They may not be."
Several challenges, however, were ones that could be solved with more planning and investment. Julie Gerberding, a former director of the C.D.C., pointed out that global vaccine-manufacturing capacity is insufficient to meet projected demand during a worldwide pandemic. Margaret Hamburg, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration who was playing the Health Secretary, argued in favor of an idea that has been floating around without funding for years: a clinical corps, equipped to travel to the source of outbreaks and try to contain them there before they reach pandemic proportions.
Even within the artificial confines of the simulation, there was a lack of leadership. Everyone agreed that the President had the final word on everything in general, but nobody seemed to be responsible for America's outbreak response specifically. The table returned endlessly to questions about who would brief Congress; who would be capable of authorizing an emergency deployment of military tents as civilian isolation units; who would call state governors to try to ensure a coordinated national response; and who, even, would attend all the funerals. As the former senator Tom Daschle, playing the Senate Majority Leader, complained halfway through the day's exercise: "We're 5 months into this crisis, and I still can't tell you who's in charge." Ironically, just a couple of days earlier, the person to whom this responsibility would have fallen in real life, Rear Admiral Tim Ziemer, had been removed from his position as the head of global health security on the White House's National Security Council after the Trump Administration cut funds for fighting pandemics.
"In a way, it's sad that we're still having these conversations," Gerberding told me, during a pause in the proceedings. Back in 2001, she helped lead the C.D.C.'s response to the anthrax attacks of that year. "We have a Department of Defense; we fund it pretty well, and it's pretty stellar," she said. "We still don't have that for this kind of defense."

- 1 Jun 2018. The grave shortcomings of Nigeria's Ebola prevention strategy
[Health News Nigeria, edited] http://www.healthnews.ng/the-grave-shortcomings-of-nigerias-ebola-prevention-strategy/ [Byline: Paul Adepoju]

Describing the country's Ebola response strategy, health minister Prof Isaac Adewole said Nigeria would be screening all travelers entering Nigeria, particularly passengers from DR Congo and neighboring countries.

"The Port Health services unit has been placed on red-alert and will heighten screening measures at ports of entry," Adewole said.

According to a statement issued by the health ministry, Nigeria has responded to the Ebola outbreak by installing "monitoring/screening gadgets" at airports across the country.

At the airport, Port Health officials use camcorder-like scanners to ascertain the body temperature of travellers. In the toilets, the airport said it is also providing sanitisers and soaps to ensure passengers maintain a high level of hygiene.

Nigeria's decision to rely on the scanners is a far-cry from practices across the world. The British Medical Journal in 2014 published a report on airport screening for Ebola which concluded that the policy of "enhanced screening" gives a false sense of reassurance.

"Our simple calculations show that an entrance screening policy will have no meaningful effect on the risk of importing Ebola," the report stated.

In the United States, Time [Magazine] also queried the effectiveness of airport screening for Ebola by citing a report published in the MMWR by officials at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC).

According to the report, U.S.'s more stringent airport entry screening for all passengers arriving from the 3 affected countries [during the 2014-2015 West African Ebola epidemic] did not prove successful either.

What Nigeria currently has in place is a far-cry from what failed in the USA, since travelers entering Nigeria are only made to face scanners and only those with suspicious thermal scans are set aside for further screening. The strategy does not have a way of knowing which traveler has come in contact with some[one] infected with Ebola.

In their BMJ editorial on airport screening for Ebola, Profs David Mabey and Stefan Flasche said the adoption of the policy of "enhanced screening" gives a false sense of reassurance. The BMJ editorial concluded that the best way to prevent Ebola from spreading is to stop it at the source and encouraged developed countries to help West African countries struggling to control the disease. But in Nigeria's case, in addition to supporting DR Congo, it cannot afford to have porous borders.

Previous experiences in Nigeria and elsewhere affirmed that thermal screening is of limited use in preventing the spread of Ebola at borders.

In addition to installing thermal screening machines, experts believe Nigeria also needs to introduce questionnaires to be filled by all travelers entering and leaving the country.

Since the fever symptom can be obscured by taking anti-fever drugs, Nigeria's Port Health authorities also need introduce modalities to quickly screen for the remaining 9 symptoms mentioned by the CDC.

While the NCDC's interest in ensuring better preparedness is commendable, the center also needs to play more proactive roles and assist port health authorities in detecting asymptomatic patients and in monitoring travelers from DR Congo and other suspicious regions for at least 21 days.

If airport screening has previously failed in Canada, Nigeria, and USA, experts believe Nigeria needs more than assurance and scanners to protect its citizens against a reemergence of Ebola.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[We continue to lead each Case Update with the DRC Ministry of Health daily updates because these provide the most current figures, which as of 2 Jun 2018 include:
- 53 confirmed, probable, and suspected Ebola cases; with 25 deaths
- 1112 people vaccinated, including 567 in Mbandaka and almost that many in Bikoro and Iboko.

Of interest, community outreach and Ebola awareness sessions have now been extended to the metropolis of Kinshasa, specifically the 2 districts that contain river ports and airports that connect from Mbandake. This is good planning foresight.

In ProMED Ebola Update 22 [31 May 2018], we touched on screening procedures for travelers within and from the DRC. Further rumblings of formal plans by other countries to screen air travelers from the DRC now seem to be underway. However, just how this should be undertaken and who should be in charge remains a controversial and confusing issue in many countries. In part [2], we have extracted several recent articles to illustrate how difficult implementing such policies can be.

According to a U.S. White House (presidential/executive branch) announcement that covered much more than what is extracted here, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) is involved in implementation of border-screening measures. But in the U.S.A., public health border security falls within the purview of not just the CDC, a branch of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, but also the National Security Council and the Department of Homeland Security. As the pandemic simulation exercise described in the New Yorker article describes, numerous questions over technical, political, and leadership issues arise that have no obvious precedent or easy solution. In Nigeria, body temperature scanners will be installed in airports, but even a seemingly straightforward procedure such as this begs the question: do they work to prevent Ebola spread? The critique published in Health News Nigeria says: "No, the emperor has no clothes." - Mod.LXL

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
DR Congo: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5836552,194]
See Also
Ebola update (24): Congo DR, case update, African aid response 20180602.5835414
Ebola update (23): Congo DR, cases, vacc. campaign targets, vaccine development 20180601.5834040
Ebola update (22): Congo DR, cases, cures, domestic and international travel 20180531.5831747
Ebola update (21): Congo DR, update, WHO, vaccination, therapeutics 20180530.5829192
Ebola update (20): Congo DR, case update, lessons, logistics, financing, flights 20180529.5824985
Ebola update (19): Congo DR, case update 20180528.5822466
Ebola update (18): cases, Uganda NOT, Congo DR vaccination campaign 20180527.5821927
Ebola update (17): case update, public fears, government responses 20180526.5820606
Ebola update (16): cases, Congo DR cultural factors, vaccine impl., case terminology 20180525.5817907
Ebola update (15): case update, quarantine breaches, border controls, vaccine 20180524.5816349
Ebola update (14): case update, response, prediction, maps 20180523.5812835
Ebola update (13): case update, prevention 20180521.5809540
Ebola update (12): update, USA, response 20180520.5806396
Ebola update (11): WHO, vaccination, response 20180519.5805133
Ebola update (10): urban case Congo DR, response, support 20180517.5801917
Ebola update (09): update, alerts, prevention 20180516.5799567
Ebola update (08): summary, emergency plan, vaccine, roads 20180515.5797415
Ebola update (07): Congo DR, nurse, Uganda susp, WHO, border, vaccine 20180513.5795881
Ebola update (06): Congo DR, susp, RFI, vulnerability, response, control 20180512.5794300
Ebola update (05): Congo DR, outbreak update, vaccine, preparedness, research 20180511.5792856
Ebola update (04): Nigeria, Kenya, Congo DR (ET), WHO 20180510.5791247
Ebola update (03): Congo DR (ET), WHO 20180509.5790577
Ebola update (02): Congo DR (ET) 20180508.5789723
.................................................lxl/msp
</body>
