<header id=021100>
Published Date: 2015-09-29 08:25:53 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Chemical exposure - China: (SH) schoolchildren
Archive Number: 20150929.3677576
</header>
<body id=021100>
CHEMICAL EXPOSURE - CHINA: (SHANGHAI) SCHOOLCHILDREN
******************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 28 Sep 2015
Source: Eastday, Shanghai Daily report [edited]
http://english.eastday.com/auto/eastday/metro/u1ai8504948.html


A primary school in Chongming County was ordered to stop using its new campus facilities after more than 100 students felt sick, and tests identified excessive formaldehyde and ammonia in its classrooms.

Students were said to have suffered from dizziness, skin rash, and even vomiting and 162 were sent to hospitals for treatment, said the county government, adding that none was hospitalized while 17 still need to take medicines.

All the 580 students in the school are now relocated to their original campus and authorities have launched a thorough investigation about the new campus.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Maps of China can be seen at http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/middle_east_and_asia/txu-pclmaps-oclc-747676570-china_admin-2011.jpg and https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3677576,361, and of Shanghai at http://bit.ly/1h75N3d. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ

Formaldehyde
------------
Most formaldehyde exposures occur by inhalation or by skin/eye contact. Formaldehyde vapor is readily absorbed from the lungs. In cases of acute exposure, formaldehyde will most likely be detected by smell; however, persons who are sensitized to formaldehyde may experience headaches and minor eye and airway irritation at levels below the odor threshold (odor threshold is 0.5 to 1.0 ppm; OSHA PEL is 0.75 ppm). For sensitized persons, odor is not an adequate indicator of formaldehyde's presence and may not provide reliable warning of hazardous concentrations. Odor adaptation can occur. Low-dose acute exposure can result in headache, rhinitis, and dyspnea; higher doses may cause severe mucous membrane irritation, burning, and lacrimation, and lower respiratory effects such as bronchitis, pulmonary edema, or pneumonia. Sensitive individuals may experience asthma and dermatitis, even at very low doses. Formaldehyde vapors are slightly heavier than air and can result in asphyxiation in poorly ventilated, enclosed, or low-lying areas.

Skin/eye contact
Ocular exposure to formaldehyde vapors produces irritation and lacrimation. Depending on the concentration, formaldehyde solutions may cause transient discomfort and irritation or more severe effects, including corneal opacification and loss of vision. Formaldehyde is absorbed through intact skin and may cause irritation or allergic dermatitis; rapid metabolism makes systemic effects unlikely following dermal exposure.

Children are more vulnerable to toxicants absorbed through the skin because of their relatively larger surface area:body weight ratio.

Formaldehyde is synthesized by the oxidation of methanol. It is among the 25 most abundantly produced chemicals in the world and is used in the manufacture of plastics, resins, and urea-formaldehyde foam insulation. Formaldehyde or formaldehyde-containing resins are used in the manufacture of chelating agents, a wide variety of organic products, glass mirrors, explosives, artificial silk, and dyes. It has been used as a disinfectant, germicide, and in embalming fluid. In the agricultural industry, formaldehyde has been used as a fumigant, preventative for mildew in wheat and rot in oats, a germicide and fungicide for plants, an insecticide, and in the manufacture of slow-release fertilizers. Formaldehyde is found in construction materials such as plywood adhesives. Formaldehyde also is or has been used in the sugar, rubber, food, petroleum, pharmaceuticals, and textiles industries.

Children exposed to the same levels of formaldehyde as adults may receive larger doses because they have greater lung surface area:body weight ratios and increased minute volumes:weight ratios. In addition, they may be exposed to higher levels than adults in the same location because of their short stature and the higher levels of formaldehyde found nearer to the ground.

Health effects
- Formaldehyde is an eye, skin, and respiratory tract irritant. Inhalation of vapors can produce narrowing of the bronchi and an accumulation of fluid in the lungs.
- Children may be more susceptible than adults to the respiratory effects of formaldehyde.
- Formaldehyde solution (formalin) causes corrosive injury to the gastrointestinal tract, especially the pharynx, epiglottis, esophagus, and stomach.
- The systemic effects of formaldehyde are due primarily to its metabolic conversion to formate, and may include metabolic acidosis, circulatory shock, respiratory insufficiency, and acute renal failure.
- Formaldehyde is a potent sensitizer and a probable human carcinogen.

Acute exposure
Formaldehyde vapor produces immediate local irritation in mucous membranes, including eyes, nose, and upper respiratory tract. Ingestion of formalin causes severe injury to the gastrointestinal tract. The exact mechanism of action of formaldehyde toxicity is not clear, but it is known that it can interact with molecules on cell membranes and in body tissues and fluids (such as, proteins and DNA) and disrupt cellular functions. High concentrations cause precipitation of proteins, which results in cell death. Absorption from the respiratory tract is very rapid; absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is also rapid, but may be delayed by ingestion with food. Once absorbed, formaldehyde is metabolized to formic acid, which may cause acid-base imbalance and a number of other systemic effects.

Children do not always respond to chemicals in the same way that adults do. Different protocols for managing their care may be needed.

Central nervous system
Malaise, headache, sleeping disturbances, irritability, and impairment of dexterity, memory, and equilibrium may result from a single, high level, exposure to formaldehyde.

Respiratory
Even fairly low concentrations of formaldehyde can produce rapid onset of nose and throat irritation, causing cough, chest pain, shortness of breath, and wheezing. Higher exposures can cause significant inflammation of the lower respiratory tract, resulting in swelling of the throat, inflammation of the windpipe and bronchi, narrowing of the bronchi, inflammation of the lungs, and accumulation of fluid in the lungs. Pulmonary injury may continue to worsen for 12 hours or more after exposure.

Previously sensitized individuals can develop severe narrowing of the bronchi at very low concentrations (for example, 0.3 ppm). Bronchial narrowing may begin immediately or can be delayed for 3 to 4 hours; effects may worsen for up to 20 hours after exposure and can persist for several days.

Exposure to certain chemical irritants can lead to reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (RADS), a chemically- or irritant-induced type of asthma.

Children may be more vulnerable to corrosive agents than adults because of the relatively smaller diameter of their airways.

Children may be more vulnerable because of relatively increased minute ventilation per kg and failure to evacuate an area promptly when exposed.

Metabolic
Accumulation of formic acid can cause an anion-gap acid-base imbalance. If formalin is ingested, absorption of the methanol stabilizer may contribute to the imbalance and can result in an osmolal gap, as well as an anion gap.

Immunologic
In persons who have been previously sensitized, inhalation and skin contact may cause various skin disorders, asthma-like symptoms, anaphylactic reactions and, rarely, hemolysis. The immune system in children continues to develop after birth, and thus, children may be more susceptible to certain chemicals.

Gastrointestinal
Ingestion of aqueous solutions of formaldehyde can result in severe corrosive injury to the esophagus and stomach. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, inflammation of the stomach, and ulceration and perforation of the oropharynx, epiglottis, esophagus, and stomach may occur. Both formaldehyde and the methanol stabilizer are easily absorbed and can contribute to systemic toxicity.

Ocular
Exposure to low concentrations of formaldehyde vapor can cause eye irritation, which abates within minutes after exposure has ended. Formalin splashed in the eyes can result in corneal ulceration or cloudiness of the eye surface, death of eye surface cells, perforation, and permanent loss of vision; these effects may be delayed for 12 hours or more.

Dermal
Exposure to formaldehyde vapor or to formalin solutions can cause skin irritation and burns. In sensitized persons, contact dermatitis may develop at very low exposure levels.

Potential sequelae
In survivors of inhalation injury, pulmonary function usually returns to normal. Eye exposure to high concentrations of formaldehyde vapor or formalin can eventually cause blindness. Narrowing of the esophagus and severe corrosive damage to the stomach lining can result from ingesting formalin.

Chronic exposure
The major concerns of repeated formaldehyde exposure are sensitization and cancer. In sensitized persons, formaldehyde can cause asthma and contact dermatitis. In persons who are not sensitized, prolonged inhalation of formaldehyde at low levels is unlikely to result in chronic pulmonary injury. Adverse effects on the central nervous system such as increased prevalence of headache, depression, mood changes, insomnia, irritability, attention deficit, and impairment of dexterity, memory, and equilibrium have been reported to result from long-term exposure. Chronic exposure may be more serious for children because of their potential longer latency period.

Carcinogenicity
The Department of Health and Human Services has determined that formaldehyde may reasonably be anticipated to be a carcinogen. In humans, formaldehyde exposure has been weakly associated with increased risk of nasal cancer and nasal tumors were observed in rats chronically inhaling formaldehyde.

Ammonia
-------
Ammonia occurs naturally and is produced by human activity. It is an important source of nitrogen which is needed by plants and animals. Bacteria found in the intestines can produce ammonia.

Ammonia is a colorless gas with a very distinct odor. This odor is familiar to many people because ammonia is used in smelling salts, many household and industrial cleaners, and window-cleaning products.

Ammonia gas can be dissolved in water. This kind of ammonia is called liquid ammonia or aqueous ammonia. Once exposed to open air, liquid ammonia quickly turns into a gas.

Ammonia is applied directly into soil on farm fields, and is used to make fertilizers for farm crops, lawns, and plants. Many household and industrial cleaners contain ammonia.

Formaldehyde is often found in some newly constructed buildings. Formaldehyde is used in the processing, or assembly of may different products including some compressed lumbers.

Why ammonia would be present is somewhat more difficult to understand. However, I am not sure what the building materials are or if there is any off-gassing from newly installed sewers.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/substances/toxsubstance.asp?toxid=2 and http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/mmg/mmg.asp?id=216&tid=39. - Mod.TG
]
See Also
2013
---
Poisoning, ammonia, fatal - China 20130901.1916061
2007
---
Formaldehyde contamination, candy - Philippines ex China (02) 20071017.3399
Formaldehyde contamination, candy - Philippines ex China 20071016.3382
.................................................sb/tg/mj/sh
</body>
