<header id=060376>
Published Date: 2014-10-03 19:39:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Polio-like illness - North America (03): USA, CDC
Archive Number: 20141003.2829159
</header>
<body id=060376>
POLIO-LIKE ILLNESS - NORTH AMERICA (03): USA, CDC
**************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Colorado, August-September 2014, MMWR 3 Oct 2014
[2] California, June 2012-June 2014, MMWR 3 Oct 2014

******
[1] Colorado, August-September 2014, MMWR 3 Oct 2014
Date: Fri 3 Oct 2014
Source: CDC. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014; 63 (Early Release); 1-2 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm63e1003a1.htm?s_cid=mm63e1003a1_e


Acute Neurologic Illness of Unknown Etiology in Children -- Colorado, August-September 2014
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: Pastula DM, Aliabadi N, Haynes AK, Messacar K, Schreiner T, Maloney J, Dominguez SR, Davizon ES, Leshem E, Fischer M, Nix WA, Oberste MS, Seward J, Feikin D, Miller L]

On 12 Sep 2014, CDC was notified by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment of a cluster of 9 children evaluated at Children's Hospital Colorado with acute neurologic illness characterized by extremity weakness, cranial nerve dysfunction (e.g., diplopia, facial droop, dysphagia, or dysarthria), or both. Neurologic illness onsets occurred during [8 Aug-15 Sep 2014]. The median age of the children was 8 years (range = 1-18 years). Other than neck, back, or extremity pain in some patients, all had normal sensation. All had a preceding febrile illness, most with upper respiratory symptoms, occurring 3-16 days (median = 7 days) before onset of neurologic illness. 7/8 patients with magnetic resonance imaging of the spinal cord had nonenhancing lesions of the gray matter of the spinal cord spanning multiple levels, and 7/9 with magnetic resonance imaging of the brain had nonenhancing brainstem lesions (most commonly the dorsal pons). 2/5 with magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral region had gadolinium enhancement of the ventral nerve roots of the cauda equine, 8 children were up to date on polio vaccination, 8 have not yet fully recovered neurologically.

8 patients demonstrated a mild to moderate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis (greater than 5 white blood cells/microL), predominantly lymphocytic, consistent with an inflammatory or infectious process. CSF glucose was normal; CSF protein was normal or mildly elevated. Initial testing of CSF from 8 patients showed no evidence of West Nile virus antibodies, although further testing is pending. CSF testing for enteroviruses, including enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), enterovirus 71, and poliovirus, by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was negative in all patients. Other CSF tests for infectious causes were unrevealing.

Initial nasopharyngeal specimens were available for 8 children, 6 were positive for rhinovirus/enterovirus by RT-PCR. These 6 positive nasopharyngeal specimens were subsequently typed: 4 were identified as EV-D68, one as rhinovirus A24, and one was not EV-D68 but has not been typed further.The specimen positive for rhinovirus A24 also was positive for adenovirus by RT-PCR. Single rectal swabs or stool samples from 8 patients were negative for enterovirus (including poliovirus) by RT-PCR.

This cluster of acute neurologic illnesses occurred against a backdrop of detection of EV-D68 causing severe respiratory disease in many parts of the United States, including Colorado (1,2). There are 2 case reports in the literature of EV-D68 causing neurologic illness (acute flaccid paralysis and encephalomyelitis) as evidenced by detection of EV-D68 in the CSF (3,4). However, given the current suspected widespread circulation of EV-D68 respiratory infections in Colorado, and the antecedent respiratory illness in most of these children, the detection of EV-D68 in nonsterile upper respiratory tract specimens in those with neurologic illness might be coincidental. Epidemiologic and laboratory investigations of these cases are ongoing.

On [19 Sep 2014], the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment issued a Health Alert informing Colorado clinicians of this cluster and requesting reports of similar cases. One additional case with similar neurologic findings was reported as a result of this advisory and is currently under investigation. On [26 Sep 2014], CDC issued a national Health Advisory (available at http://www.bt.cdc.gov/han/han00370.asp), which provides guidance for identifying and reporting cases. Clinicians should report to their local and state health departments patients aged less than or equal to 21 years with

1) acute onset of focal limb weakness occurring on or after [1 Aug 2014], and

2) magnetic resonance imaging showing a spinal cord lesion largely restricted to gray matter.

To prevent infections in general, persons should stay home if they are ill, wash their hands often with soap and water, avoid close contact (such as touching and shaking hands) with those who are ill, and clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces.

Acknowledgments:
Wallace A, Ludke J, Robinson C, Stence N, Brock C, Children's Hospital Colorado. Herlihy R, Alden N, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. Gerber S, Rha B, Cortese M, Sejvar J, Midgley C, Prill M, Rogers S, Staples JE, Pallansch M, and the EV-D68 laboratory investigation group, CDC.

References:
1. Midgley CM, Jackson MA, Selvarangan R, et al. Severe respiratory illness associated with enterovirus D68 -- Missouri and Illinois, 2014. MMWR 2014;63:798-9. [Available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6336a4.htm?s_cid=mm6336a4_w.]
2. CDC. Enterovirus D68 in the United States, 2014. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/non-polio-enterovirus/outbreaks/EV-D68-outbreaks.html.
3. Kreuter JD, Barnes A, McCarthy JE, et al. A fatal central nervous system enterovirus 68 infection. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011;135:793-6.
4. CDC. Enterovirus surveillance -- United States, 1970-2005. MMWR 2006;55(No. SS-8). [Available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5508a1.htm.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] California, June 2012-June 2014, MMWR 3 Oct 2014
Date: Fri 3 Oct 2014
Source: CDC. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014; 63 (Early Release); 3-4 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm63e1003a2.htm?s_cid=mm63e1003a2_e


Acute Flaccid Paralysis with Anterior Myelitis -- California, June 2012-June 2014
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: Patrick Ayscue, DVM, Keith Van Haren, MD, Heather Sheriff, Emmanuelle Waubant, MD, PhD, Paul Waldron, MD, Shigeo Yagi, PhD, Cynthia Yen, MPH, Anna Clayton, MPH, Tasha Padilla, Chao Pan, MPH, John Reichel, Kathleen Harriman, PhD, James Watt, MD, James Sejvar, MD, William Allan Nix, Daniel Feikin, MD, Carol Glaser, DVM, MD]

In August 2012, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) was contacted by a San Francisco Bay area clinician who requested poliovirus testing for an unvaccinated man aged 29 years with acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) associated with anterior myelitis (i.e., evidence of inflammation of the spinal cord involving the grey matter including anterior horn cell bodies) and no history of international travel during the month before symptom onset. Within 2 weeks, CDPH had received reports of 2 additional cases of AFP with anterior myelitis of unknown etiology. Testing at CDPH's Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory for stool, nasopharyngeal swab, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) did not detect the presence of an enterovirus (EV), the genus of the family Picornaviridae that includes poliovirus. Additional laboratory testing for infectious diseases conducted at the CDPH Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory did not identify a causative agent to explain the observed clinical syndrome reported among the patients.

To identify other cases of AFP with anterior myelitis and elucidate possible common etiologies, CDPH posted alerts in official communications for California local health departments during December 2012, July 2013, and February 2014. Reports of cases of neurologic illness received by CDPH were investigated throughout this period, and clinicians were encouraged to submit clinical samples for testing. A total of 23 cases of AFP with anterior myelitis of unknown etiology were identified. Epidemiologic and laboratory investigation did not identify poliovirus infection as a possible cause for the observed cases. No common etiology was identified to explain the reported cases, although EV-D68 was identified in upper respiratory tract specimens of 2 patients. EV infection, including poliovirus infection, should be considered in the differential diagnosis in cases of AFP with anterior myelitis and testing performed per CDC guidelines (1).

A case was defined as AFP in at least one limb consistent with anterior myelitis, as indicated by neuroimaging of the spine or electrodiagnostic studies (e.g., nerve conduction studies and electromyography), and with no known alternative etiology, in a person with symptom onset during January 2012-June 2014. Among the 23 cases identified, younger persons and males were more frequently affected, with a median age of 10 years (range = 1-73 years); 15 were aged less than 15 years, and 56 percent were male. Similar to the race/ethnicity distribution in California, 7 (30 percent) patients were white, 6 (26 percent) were Asian, 6 (26 percent) were Hispanic, one (4 percent) was black, 1 (4 percent) was of multiple race, and 2 (9 percent) were of unknown race. Affected patients resided in diverse geographic areas throughout California with no indication of clustering. During the 30-month inquiry, no indication of seasonality or temporal trends in disease onset was established ([Figure: Number of cases of acute flaccid paralysis with anterior myelitis (N = 23), by month of neurologic symptom onset -- California, 2012-2014, available at source URL]).

Common features among the clinical presentations of patients included an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal prodrome less than 10 days before AFP onset (83 percent), CSF pleocytosis (83 percent), and absence of sensory deficits (78 percent). Ten patients (43 percent) also had concomitant mental status changes; 8 patients (34 percent) had cranial nerve abnormalities. Patients typically had extended hospital stays (median = 17 days), and of 13 patients with available information, all had prolonged paralysis persisting at 60 days follow-up. Five patients were ventilator-dependent when discharged from the hospital to rehabilitation facilities, and one death was reported in an adult. Of 10 patients with mental status changes, eight (80 percent) had returned to baseline cognitive function at the time of discharge.

Specimens were available for testing from 19 (83 percent) of the patients. The CDPH Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory tested nasopharyngeal or throat swabs (18), stool or rectal swabs (14), serum (17), and CSF (17) for evidence of recent infection with numerous infectious agents, including EVs (including poliovirus), arboviruses, herpes viruses (HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, and EBV), parechoviruses, adenoviruses, rabies, influenza A and B, human metapneumovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza 1-4, _Mycoplasma pneumoniae_, rickettsial pathogens, and free-living amoebas. Results were unremarkable except for the following: 1) mycoplasma immunoglobulin M-positive serologies in 2 patients (these same patients had negative mycoplasma throat polymerase chain reaction [PCR] tests), 2) rhinovirus-positive PCR from a respiratory specimen in one patient, and 3) EV-positive PCR from throat or upper respiratory tract specimens in 2 patients; these EVs were sequenced as EV-D68. Testing was limited by incomplete and late collection of specimens; respiratory samples collected less than 7 days of paralysis onset were submitted for 9 (39 percent) patients, and stool or rectal specimens were submitted for 15 (65 percent) patients. Specimens meeting World Health Organization (WHO) or CDC guidelines for poliovirus detection (e.g., 2 stool specimens collected greater than or equal to 24 hours apart and less than 14 days after symptom onset) were submitted for only 2 of the patients. Serologic testing was of limited value because specimens often were collected after patients had received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy.

Poliovirus was determined to be an unlikely etiology for any of the cases based on epidemiologic and limited laboratory investigation findings. Nonetheless, because AFP with anterior myelitis is the classic presentation of paralytic poliomyelitis, CDPH attempted to rule out poliovirus infection. Of 14 patients with available information, 12 had previously received polio vaccine; one child and one adult were unvaccinated because of personal belief exemptions. Pre-IVIG serum was available from the unvaccinated child and tested negative for neutralizing antibodies against poliovirus at CDC laboratories. None of the patients reported travel out of the United States during the month before symptom onset.

Discussion
----------
AFP has numerous etiologies and can prove diagnostically challenging; however, after the widespread implementation of polio vaccination worldwide, the subset of patients suffering from AFP with anterior myelitis is markedly smaller than the population of patients suffering from other forms of AFP. AFP is not a reportable syndrome in California, or any other US state, other than as an occurrence of an unusual disease, and whether these cases represent an actual increase from baseline incidence of AFP with anterior myelitis in this population is unclear. A study examining AFP in children aged less than 15 years in California during 1992-1998 reported an incidence of 1.4 AFP cases per 100 000 children per year, with the most common diagnoses being Guillain-Barre syndrome (23 percent), unspecified AFP (21 percent), and botulism (12 percent). None of the 245 reviewed cases had recognized anterior myelitis, which is characteristic of paralytic poliomyelitis (2).

The etiology of AFP with anterior myelitis in the cases described in this report remains undetermined. EVs circulate widely in the United States, causing an estimated 10-15 million symptomatic, mostly nonneurologic illnesses annually (2,3). EVs, other than poliovirus, are rarely known to result in AFP with anterior myelitis. EV-D68 infections in most patients manifest as purely respiratory illnesses. A single case of an EV-D68 infection associated with AFP has been reported in the literature (4), and an additional case was reported through nationwide EV surveillance (5). CDC is working with state and local health departments to better characterize the respiratory disease health burden and spectrum of illness associated with the recent increase in EV-D68 respiratory illness across the United States (6). The significance of EV-D68 detection in 2 of the cases in this report is unclear, particularly because it was detected in upper respiratory tract specimens and not CSF. However, EVs can prove challenging to identify as a cause of neurologic syndromes, including AFP. Poliovirus and EV-A71, well-documented causes of serious neurologic disease including poliomyelitis-like paralysis, are infrequently recovered from spinal fluid (7,8). In addition, delayed collection of laboratory specimens after respiratory illness and paralysis onset might have reduced the capacity to recover etiologic agents.

Paralysis caused by poliovirus infection results from anterior horn cell injury and is characterized by poor recovery of motor function. Sensory loss, as reported in 22 percent of the cases in this report, is not a feature commonly associated with patients with paralysis because of poliovirus infection. However, sensory symptoms (e.g., pain and paresthesia) have been reported with poliovirus infections. The last cases of paralytic poliomyelitis caused by endemic transmission of wild poliovirus in the United States occurred in 1979. Global poliovirus eradication efforts have greatly reduced the risk for introduction of poliovirus into the United States; wild-type poliovirus is currently endemic only in Afghanistan, Nigeria, and Pakistan; however, polio has been exported to countries that have previously been polio-free, and 7 other countries have had cases or transmission of wild poliovirus in the last 12 months (9). Cases of vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis cases do occur in countries using oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) (10). OPV is no longer available in the United States; inactivated poliovirus vaccine has been recommended exclusively in the United States since 2000.

Although polio is no longer endemic in the United States, ruling out poliovirus infection in clinically compatible, unexplained cases of AFP, particularly those with anterior myelitis, is important to ensure that any importation of poliovirus is quickly identified and investigated. WHO and CDC have guidelines for epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory investigations of AFP to rule out poliovirus infection (10). Clinical and epidemiologic investigation should include a careful neurologic examination to characterize specific sensory (e.g., sensory symptoms versus sensory loss) as well as motor findings, querying patients about recent international travel (less than 30 days before onset), and contact with persons who recently traveled, particularly to regions with polio cases or regions where OPV is used. Documented history of vaccination and whether inactivated poliovirus vaccine or OPV was administered should be noted, including dates of administration, number of doses, and manufacturer, if the information is available.

Specimens should be collected early during the course of disease for laboratory testing. Collection of specimens should follow CDC and WHO guidelines and include 2 stool specimens collected greater than or equal to 24 hours apart and less than 14 days after symptom onset, serum before administration of IVIG, and throat swabs. Of patients who had samples tested at the CDPH Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory as described in this report, only 2 met the specifications for ruling out poliovirus infection as recommended by WHO or CDC guidelines*, **, ***; all others lacked 2 stool specimens collected greater than or equal to 24 hours apart and less than 14 days after symptom onset.

Paralytic poliomyelitis cases are immediately reportable to all state and local health departments in the United States. A confirmed paralytic poliomyelitis case should be reported to CDC within 4 hours after meeting notification criteria.

Although AFP with anterior myelitis or grey matter involvement comprises a subset of patients with AFP, these cases can be challenging to distinguish at initial presentation before clinical, imaging, and laboratory study results are available. Thus, specimen collection to definitively rule out poliovirus infection from possible differential diagnoses should be considered among all patients with AFP of unknown etiology or a suspected viral etiology. This is particularly important for persons who are unimmunized and have a history of travel to countries with endemic polio or countries that use OPV for routine immunization.

Physicians treating patients with AFP of unknown etiology should work with their local and state health departments to rule out poliomyelitis early during the course of disease. To ensure adequate specimens for poliovirus testing, specimens should be collected according to CDC and WHO guidelines.

Acknowledgments:
David Bell, MD, Susan I. Gerber, MD, M. Steve Oberste, PhD, Mark Pallansch. PhD, Jane Seward, MBBS, John Watson, MD, CDC. Jill Hacker, PhD, Sharon Messenger, PhD, Debra Wadford, PhD, Dongxiang Xia, PhD, Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory, California Department of Public Health.

References:
1. Marx A, Glass JD, Sutter RW. Differential diagnosis of acute flaccid paralysis and its role in poliomyelitis surveillance. Epidemiol Rev 2000;22:298-316.
2. Zangwill KM, Yeh SH, Wong EJ, et al. Paralytic syndromes in children: epidemiology and relationship to vaccination. Pediatr Neurol 2010;42:206-12.
3. Strikas RA, Anderson LJ, Parker RA. Temporal and geographic patterns of isolates of nonpolio enterovirus in the United States, 1970-1983. J Infect Dis 1986;153:346-51.
4. Kreuter JD, Barnes A, McCarthy JE, et al. A fatal central nervous system Enterovirus 68 infection. Archiv Pathol Lab Med 2011;135:793-6.
5. CDC. Enterovirus surveillance -- United States, 1970-2005. MMWR 2006;55(No. SS-8).
6. Midgley CM, Jackson MA, Selvarangan R, et al. Severe respiratory illness associated with enterovirus D68 -- Missouri and Illinois, 2014. MMWR 2014;63;798-9.
7. Perez-Velez CM, Anderson MS, Robinson CC, et al. Outbreak of neurologic Enterovirus type 71 disease: a diagnostic challenge. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45:950-7.
8. Wallace GS, Oberste SM. Polio. In: Roush SW, McIntyre L, Baldy LM, eds. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases, 5th edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2012. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/front-portion.pdf.
9. Moturi EK, Porter KA, Wassilak SG. Progress toward polio eradication -- worldwide, 2013-2014. MMWR 2014;63:468-72.
10 . World Health Organization. WHO vaccine-preventable diseases: monitoring system. 2014 global summary. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2014. Available at http://apps.who.int/immunization_monitoring/globalsummary.

*Additional information about CDC guidelines is available at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt12-polio.html.
**Additional information about WHO guidelines are available at https://www.hpsc.ie/hpsc/a-z/vaccinepreventable/polio/guidance/file,2461,en.pdf.
***Additional information about CDPH specimen collection guidelines for infectious disease testing in cases of neurologic illness is available at http://www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/vrdl/pages/neurologicsurveillancetesting.aspx.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[It is nice to have official reports providing details on the investigations into the 2 reported "clusters" of cases with polio-like illness -- the current cluster in Colorado, and the earlier reported cluster in California.

From the tone of the discussion section, and information provided in the description of the California cluster, it appears as though poliovirus has not as yet been conclusively excluded from the differential diagnosis as the appropriate laboratory studies had not been done as per accepted protocol. The "hazards" of elimination of domestic circulation of viruses is that clinicians currently in practice have not seen clinical cases in many years (and many of the younger clinicians have never seen clinical cases of the disease -- as stated above, the last wild poliovirus associated outbreak in the USA was in 1979). Hence, the window for adequate specimen collection closes before a definitive diagnosis is confirmed through laboratory testing.

Back in the 1980s when the polio eradication initiative was in the early formative stages (beginning 1st in Brazil and then expanding to the Americas region), and before the network of certified laboratories was in place, a case of AFP with persistent residual paralysis 60 days after onset of symptoms was classified as a probable case of polio, and vaccination activities in the affected areas were conducted.

I, myself, when reviewing the earlier reports had presumed that appropriate testing had been done to rule out polio, forgetting results of retrospective case assessments I had participated in, in other countries where physicians felt "it couldn't be polio" so studies weren't even done. Apparently this was replicated both on the earlier cases in California, and full studies are still pending on the cases in Colorado (note that single rectal swabs/stool specimens were taken on 8 out of the 9 initial cases).

Given the above discussions and information, while the general sense is that this may well be a new polio-like neurologic syndrome seen following another viral illness, possibly the EV-D68 that is currently widely prevalent in North America, it is clear that the old culprit, the poliovirus, has not as yet been adequately ruled out.

It would be very interesting to do retrospective studies elsewhere (outside of California) to see whether there have been clusters, or sporadic cases of AFP that have been "under the radarscope" as well. In addition, perhaps environmental studies looking for enteroviruses in sewage sampling (including poliovirus) might provide circumstantial evidence of virus circulation.

We await more information as it becomes available.

For a map of the USA, see https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2829159,106. - Mod.MPP]
See Also
Polio-like illness - North America (02): USA, Canada (AB), RFI 20141002.2826111
Polio-like illness - North America: Canada (BC) 20140930.2819618
Polio-like illness - USA (03): (MA, CO, MO) enterovirus 68 susp. RFI 20140930.2818951
Polio-like illness - USA (02): (CO) enterovirus 68 susp, alert, RFI 20140927.2809908
Polio-like illness - USA: (CA) enterovirus 68 susp, RFI 20140224.2296126
.................................................mpp/je/jw
</body>
