<header id=051410>
Published Date: 2013-09-26 09:19:03 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Corynebacterium, equine - Canada: (AB)
Archive Number: 20130926.1968236
</header>
<body id=051410>
CORYNEBACTERIUM, EQUINE - CANADA: (ALBERTA)
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 24 Sep 2013
Source: Canadian Cattlemen [edited]
http://www.canadiancattlemen.ca/news/pigeon-fever-arrives-in-southern-alberta-horses/1002613876/


Southern Alberta horse owners are being advised to watch their animals for large lumps on their chests, following what are apparently the 1st-ever cases of pigeon fever in the province.

Pigeon fever is a disease common in the southern States, said Dr Connie Fancy, veterinarian with Claresholm Veterinary Services. This year, Fancy and 3 other vets who work in her practice have seen about 20 horses infected with pigeon fever in Claresholm, Fort MacLeod, Lethbridge, and Taber.

Fancy said she talked to a veterinarian further north, who hasn't seen any cases in Calgary or east of Calgary. "Pincher Creek hasn't seen any cases either, so that's sort of interesting," she said.

Pigeon fever is a bacterial infection transmitted by flies. The disease causes abscesses to form on a horse's chest muscles.

"That's why it's called pigeon fever," said Fancy. "The horse looks like a pigeon with these swollen chest muscles."

Abscesses can also grow under the belly, on a horse's face, or around the ears. The horse will develop scaly skin, followed by hard lumps that burst and drain thick pus. When pus drains, flies flock to the pus and spread the disease.

"The flies are the carriers and they carry the pus infection to the next horse by burying in their skin. The flies create ulcers on the skin, and then infect the next horse," said Fancy.

The disease is contagious, but is not spread by horse-to-horse contact. Any fly that burrows in a horse's skin can be a carrier. The bacteria can infect other animals as well but there are different strains, so it's rare for cross-infection to occur.

There's no vaccine and no way to prevent pigeon fever. Antibiotics are useless in pigeon fever cases, since the drugs have no effect on the bacterium in the equine's body. If antibiotics are used before the abscesses drain completely, the infection can be prolonged and abscesses can develop internally.

About 8 per cent of affected horses develop internal infections, and about 30 per cent of these horses die. Fortunately, horses with external abscesses have a high survival rate.

When abscesses are drained, producers need to flush the abscesses on a daily basis, keep the area clean, and use fly spray to keep the flies from spreading the pus. External infections should clear up after several weeks. Infected horses need to be isolated from other horses.

"If flies get into the discharge, they can transmit it to other horses that are quite far away. You have to actually collect that discharge and burn your bedding, and disinfect anywhere the discharge has touched," Fancy said. Producers can also use fly sheets or fly masks to keep flies away from the discharge.

Horses with pigeon fever show soreness or stiffness in their front legs because of the thick abscesses in the pectoral muscles.

"They almost look like they're foundered because they can't move their legs properly in the front end," Fancy said. "That's the 1st sign you see." Sick horses may also develop a fever.

Fancy cautions against letting abscesses burst on their own. "You can get a huge crater of a wound and those can be very difficult to manage." She recently saw one horse with pigeon fever that had to be put down, even though it had an external lump, as the wound was too big to heal. Fancy recommends horse owners take any horse with an abscess to their veterinarian. Vets can ultrasound to see when the lump should be opened and drained in a controlled manner. "Then you can get a tube in there and have the owner flushing in it," she said.

Since the disease is transmitted by flies, it appears in the peak season of flies.

"If this is something that is now endemic in Alberta, we'd be looking at it in mid- to late summer, when flies are at their peak," Fancy said. "We have no idea what the disease will do now that it's here. It's possible that the disease may die off during the winter. It's hard to say."

[Byline: Alexis Kienlen]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Alberta, Canada may be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/73a6.

Pigeon fever, pigeon breast, breastbone fever, dryland distemper, dryland strangles, false strangles, or false distemper are names by which this disease -- caused by the bacterium _Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis_ -- is most frequently known. Geographically, it was at one time considered to be a disease of California, where it is regarded as endemic. However, it is much more widespread now, especially in the western states of the USA, but it has a worldwide distribution. It is a seasonal disease, usually appearing in late fall, but it can appear sporadically at any time of year.

The signs of pigeon fever can also initially resemble those of other diseases such as strangles. Sometimes the only initial signs are lameness and a reluctance to move. It can strike a horse of any age, sex, or breed, but usually attacks young adult animals. There is a low incidence in foals.

It has also been diagnosed in cattle, and a similar disease affects sheep and goats. The disease is not transmissible to humans, although humans can carry the infectious agent on shoes, clothing, hands, or barn tools and transfer it to other animals.

Clinical signs include lameness, fever, lethargy, and weight loss, usually accompanied by very deep abscesses and multiple sores along the chest, midline, and groin area, and, sometimes, the back. Abscesses also can develop internally.

The disease is called pigeon fever because infected animals often develop abscesses in their pectoral muscles, which swell to make it resemble a pigeon's chest. Although the disease is considered seasonal, with most cases occurring in early fall, a number of cases have been confirmed during winter months and other times of the year as well.

The causative bacteria live in the soil and can enter the animal's body through wounds, broken skin, or through mucous membranes. In addition, some researchers believe pigeon fever may be transmitted by flies.

Of the types of disease (external abscesses, internal abscesses, or limb infection [ulcerative lymphangitis]), ulcerative lymphangitis is the commonest form worldwide and rarely involves more than one leg at a time. Usually, multiple small, draining sores develop above the fetlock.

The commonest form of the disease in the United States is external abscessation, which often forms deep in the muscles and can be very large. Usually, it appears in the pectoral region, the ventral abdomen, and the groin area. After spontaneous rupture, or lancing, the wound will exude liquid, light tan-colored, malodorous pus.

The commonest forms are external abscess and lymphangitis, with the prognosis of a full recovery being generally good. Internal abscesses can occur and are very difficult to treat.

The contagious nature of the disease means an accurate diagnosis is imperative, and treatment should be initiated as well as control of insects and the rigid practice of biosecurity.

Horse owners should be aware of the clinical signs and understand that veterinary care must be timely. Infected horses should be isolated, the abscesses properly treated, and the drainage properly disposed of. The area where the infected horse is kept must be properly cleaned and completely disinfected because this is a very hardy bacterium. Bacteria in the pus draining from abscesses on infected horses can survive from one to 55 days in the environment. They have also been shown to survive from one to 8 days on surface contaminants and from 7 to 55 days within feces, hay, straw, or wood shavings. Lower temperatures prolong the survival time.

Pest control is extremely important. The bacteria may be transported between animals by flies.

Horses may become infected but not develop abscesses for weeks. The disease usually manifests in younger horses but can occur in any age, sex, and breed.

A different biotype of the organism is responsible for a chronic contagious disease of sheep and goats, caseous lymphadenitis (CL). Either biotype can occur in cattle.

Treatment in horses often consists of hot packs or poultices applied to abscesses to encourage opening. Open abscesses should be drained and regularly flushed with saline solution. Surgical or deep lancing may be required, depending on the depth of the abscess or the thickness of the capsule, and should be done by your veterinarian. Ultrasound can aid in locating deep abscesses so that drainage can be accomplished. External abscesses can be cleaned with a 0.1 per cent povidone-iodine solution. Antiseptic-soaked gauze may be packed into the open wound. A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, such as phenylbutazone, can be used to control swelling and pain.

Antibiotics are controversial. Their use in these cases has sometimes been associated with chronic abscessation and, if inadequately used, may contribute to abscesses, according to one study. The most commonly used antibiotics for the treatment of this condition are procaine penicillin G, administered intramuscularly, or trimethoprim-sulfa. In the case of internal abscesses, prolonged penicillin therapy is necessary.

Buckets or other containers should be used to collect pus from draining abscesses, and this infectious material should be disposed of properly. Consistent and careful disposal of infected bedding, hay, straw, or other material used in the stall is vitally important. Thoroughly clean and disinfect stalls, paddocks, all utensils, and tack. Pest control for insects is also very important.

With treatment, recovery usually takes place between 2 weeks and 77 days. Although some animals may have recurrences, recovery is generally complete, and the prognosis is good.

(Portions of this comment had been extracted from http://www.completerider.com/ucolorado/PIGEONFEVERINEQUINES.html in the past.) - Mod.TG]
See Also
2012
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (07): (KS): 20121228.1472132
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (06): (KS): 20121227.1470759
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (05): (MO) 20121116.1411851
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (04): (FL) 20120706.1191802
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (03): (FL) 20120530.1149747
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (02): (OK) 20120202.1028113
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (TX) 20120118.1013774
2011
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (LA) 20111211.3566
2010
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (02): (FL) 20100528.1780
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (NV) 20100401.1047
2009
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (CO) 20090819.2934
2007
----
Pigeon fever, equine - USA (OR) 20071018.3408
2004
----
Corynebacterium, penguin - New Zealand (02) 20041222.3378
Corynebacterium, penguin - New Zealand 20041127.3171
2003
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) (03) 20030117.0143
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) (02) 20030112.0104
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) 20030111.0096
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Colorado) 20030110.0085
2002
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Wyoming) 20021125.5895
.................................................sb/tg/mj/mpp
</body>
