<header id=052410>
Published Date: 2013-10-26 13:50:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Histoplasmosis - USA: (MT) expanded range
Archive Number: 20131026.2020454
</header>
<body id=052410>
HISTOPLASMOSIS - USA: (MONTANA) EXPANDED RANGE
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 25 Oct 2013
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013; 62(42); 834-837 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6242a2.htm?s_cid=mm6242a2_w


Histoplasmosis is caused by infection with the dimorphic fungus, _Histoplasma capsulatum_, following inhalation of contaminated soil (1). Among symptomatic patients, the commonest clinical presentation is acute pneumonia (1-3). Persons with compromised immune systems are at risk for disseminated histoplasmosis, a severe illness requiring antifungal therapy that is often characterized by fever, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss (2,4). _H. capsulatum_ is endemic in the Ohio River and Mississippi River valleys, where it is found in soil enriched with bird droppings and bat guano (1,5-7). During November 2012 to February 2013, histoplasmosis was diagnosed in 4 Montana residents by 4 different physicians. No epidemiologic links among the cases were identified. Each patient's medical records were reviewed, and their exposure and travel histories were obtained. 3 patients reported no recent travel outside of Montana and likely were exposed in Montana, which is west of areas where _H. capsulatum_ is recognized as endemic (5,6). One patient reported recent travel to California, where she was exposed to potting soil containing bat guano. Low clinical suspicion, probably related to lack of history of exposure to areas where _H. capsulatum_ is known to be endemic, likely delayed diagnosis and appropriate therapy for 3 patients. Health-care providers should be aware of the possibility of histoplasmosis in Montana and consider the diagnosis in patients with clinically compatible illnesses.

Patient 1
---------
A woman aged 59 years with a history of breast cancer who was treated with chemotherapy and radiation in 2002 was evaluated in February 2011 for left parotid gland swelling (table [see source URL - Mod.LL]) A computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous (IV) contrast revealed a 2-cm lesion in the tail of the parotid gland. On 6 Apr 2012, the patient underwent a fine needle aspiration of her left parotid gland; cytology revealed atypical lymphoepithelial cells. In October 2012, the patient reported continued swelling behind her left ear, which eventually developed into a weeping lesion. She reported no fever, chills, night sweats, weight loss, cough, or difficulty breathing. On 11 Nov 2012, she underwent a left parotidectomy. Histopathology revealed lymphoepithelial cysts and necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with rare yeast forms consistent with _H. capsulatum_. A follow-up urine histoplasma antigen enzyme immunoassay (EIA) on 7 Dec 2012 was negative. The patient was referred for treatment of histoplasmosis and started on itraconazole therapy.

The patient was a retired administrator and had never lived outside southwest Montana. She reported engaging in walking, fishing, and gardening, and had multiple bird feeders. She did not report any exposures to caves or bats. In May 2012, the patient visited Sacramento, California, where she participated in the potting of plants using soil labeled as containing bat guano. No other persons exposed to the same potting soil during her trip were known to have become ill. Other than the trip to Sacramento, the patient had not traveled outside of Montana for several years.

Patient 2
---------
An adolescent boy aged 17 years sought care in November 2011 with complaints of fatigue. Following a positive heterophile antibody test, he was diagnosed with mononucleosis. Over the next 9 months, the patient continued to experience fatigue, headaches, and night sweats, and had a 5-pound (2.3 kg) weight loss. In September 2012, he sought follow-up care and was noted to have clinically significant anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. On 19 Sep 2012, a CT scan of the pelvis with IV contrast revealed extensive mesenteric and bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy. At that time, a chest radiograph, complete blood count, electrolytes, and liver function tests were within normal limits. His Epstein-Barr virus immunoglobulin IgM was 11.7 U/mL (normal = 0-43.9 U/mL) and IgG was 539.0 U/mL (normal = 0-21.9 U/mL). On 27 Dec 2012, he underwent a lymph node biopsy of an anterior cervical lymph node and a submandibular node that revealed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with yeast forms consistent with _H. capsulatum_. A follow-up urine EIA on 15 Jan 2013 was negative. The patient was started on itraconazole therapy.

The patient had lived in south west Montana since birth. He reported frequent outdoor recreational activities, including exploring caves, trundling (rolling large rocks or boulders down hillsides), wakeboarding, camping, hiking, and snowboarding. He also worked as a landscaper during the summer of 2012. He did not report any known exposures to bats or bird droppings. His last travel outside of Montana was to Omaha, Nebraska, in 2007.

Patient 3
---------
A man aged 79 years with a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type II, tobacco use, and colon cancer treated with a partial colectomy in 2003 experienced fatigue and fever on 3 Jul 2012, and was evaluated in an emergency department on 8 Jul 2012; a chest radiograph was normal. Because of persistent fevers noted when the patient was reevaluated on 18 Jul 2012, the patient underwent a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis without IV contrast; the scan revealed a left lower lobe pneumonia and mild pulmonary fibrosis of the right lung base. Laboratory analysis of a blood specimen revealed a mild leukocytosis and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 81 mm/hr (normal: 0-20 mm/hr). The patient was started on moxifloxacin 400 mg daily for 10 days. On reevaluation on 25 Jul 2013, the patient was noted to be afebrile and clinically improved. On 10 Oct 2012, the patient underwent a follow-up CT scan of the chest without IV contrast, which revealed a 3 cm by 1.3 cm oval opacity in the posterior left lower lung and a 4 mm high-density nodule in the right lower lung consistent with a calcified granuloma. At this time, the patient's leukocytosis had resolved, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 42 mm/hr. In November 2012, the patient underwent a CT-guided biopsy of the left lower lung lesion that demonstrated a granulomatous pneumonitis.

In December 2012, a positron emission tomographic scan of the chest demonstrated mediastinal and subcarinal lymphadenopathy and a left lung nodule that had increased glucose uptake. The patient then underwent mediastinoscopy with tissue biopsy. In February 2013, the biopsy specimen was culture-positive for _H. capsulatum_. The patient was referred for treatment of histoplasmosis.

The patient was a rancher and lived in eastern Montana. He reported travel more than 30 years earlier to Canada and Europe but reported no travel since that time outside of eastern and south central Montana. During the 2 weeks before illness onset, he reported mowing grass in a pasture and attending a local rodeo. He did not report any exposures to bird droppings, bat guano, caves, or potting soils.

Patient 4
---------
A woman aged 76 years with a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type II experienced nasal congestion, nonproductive cough, headaches, chest pressure, shortness of breath, and wheezing on 17 Jan 2013; 4 days later, the patient was evaluated in an emergency department. She did not report any fever or myalgias. On examination, she was noted to be afebrile, had bilateral expiratory wheezing, and was hypoxic with a pulse oximetry oxygen saturation of 77 percent on room air. The patient tested positive for influenza A using a rapid diagnostic test and was hospitalized for additional care. She underwent CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with IV contrast, which revealed bibasilar patchy infiltrates along with retroperitoneal and mesenteric lymphadenopathy and rectal wall thickening. The patient's urine tested positive for histoplasma antigen by EIA. When discharged from the hospital, she was referred for treatment of histoplasmosis, and started on itraconazole therapy.

The patient lived in south western Montana and was a retired custodian. She enjoyed reading indoors, and engaged in no outdoor activities other than planting flowers in outdoor flowerpots each spring. She denied known exposures to bird droppings, bat guano, bat guano-containing potting soil, or caves. She reported no travel outside of Montana in the several years before her diagnosis.

Editorial note
--------------
3 of 4 patients with diagnosed histoplasmosis reported no recent travel and likely acquired their infections in Montana. Although patient 1 likely acquired her infection in Montana before traveling out of state, the possibility also exists that she acquired infection in California following exposure to bat guano-containing potting soil. Each of the 4 patients had immunocompromising conditions present before symptom onset, increasing their risk for _H. capsulatum_ disease (2). Patient 2 might have acquired infection during a cave exploration-related bat guano exposure. The lack of recent travel history to recognized areas with histoplasmosis endemicity likely contributed to diagnostic delays for 3 patients; of these, 2 patients also had unusual clinical presentations, likely further contributing to diagnostic delays.

_H. capsulatum_ culture from body fluids and tissues provides the strongest evidence of histoplasmosis, but is insensitive (8). Patient 3 was diagnosed after _H. capsulatum_ isolation from a pulmonary nodule biopsy. The absence of recent travel outside of Montana for this patient suggests that the infection was acquired in Montana. Clinical evidence for patients 2 and 4 suggests their Histoplasma infections also were acquired in Montana.

Patients 1 and 2 were diagnosed by histopathology performed by different pathologists. Histopathology provides presumptive evidence of infection, but specificity depends on pathologist experience (8). Urine antigen detection also is used to diagnose disseminated histoplasmosis (2,8,9), but its sensitivity is greater among immunocompromised persons (93.1 per cent compared with 73.3 per cent) (9). The specificity of urine EIA for histoplasmosis has been shown to be 99 per cent in both healthy and immunocompromised persons (8,9), although false-positives are possible among patients with other endemic fungal infections (2). Why patients 1 and 2 had negative urine EIA tests following histopathologic diagnoses is unclear. Although patient 2 likely was immunocompromised when he developed disease, his immune system might have recovered by the time of EIA testing.

The recognized zone of histoplasmosis endemicity extends from the Ohio River Valley west into North Dakota and South Dakota (6). States further west, including Montana, are not typically considered areas where histoplasmosis is endemic. However, 2 recently published studies provide limited data that histoplasmosis endemicity might extend into Montana and other western states (5,10). The 4 cases described in this report provide additional evidence that histoplasmosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of clinically compatible illness in Montana residents.

The findings in this report are subject to at least 2 limitations. First, confirmation of the diagnosis by isolation of _H. capsulatum_ in culture was not performed for 3 patients. Second, the source of each patient's infection could not be determined with certainty; patient 1 likely acquired her infection in Montana, but also could have acquired her infection from exposure to bat guano-containing potting soil in California. Similarly, one or more patients might have had reactivation of latent disease after _H. capsulatum_ infection acquired from an area when histoplasmosis was endemic many years before symptom onset. Environmental studies could help determine if _H. capsulatum_ is endemic in Montana (5,6).

A total of 3 patients experienced diagnostic delays, likely in part because none reported recent travel to areas where _H. capsulatum_ is endemic. Health-care providers should be aware of the possibility of _H. capsulatum_ in Montana and the potential for histoplasmosis in patients with clinically compatible illnesses, even in the absence of a history of travel outside of Montana.

References
----------
1. Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis. Clin Chest Med 2009;30: 217-225.
2. Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis: a clinical and laboratory update. Clin Microbiol Rev 2007;20: 115-132.
3. McKinsey DS, McKinsey JP: Pulmonary histoplasmosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2011;32: 735-744.
4. Wheat LJ, Freifeld AG, Kleiman MB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of patients with histoplasmosis: 2007 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45: 807-825.
5. Baddley JW, Winthrop KL, Patkar NM, et al. Geographic distribution of endemic fungal infections among older persons, United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17: 1664-1669.
6. Edwards LB, Acquaviva FA, Livesay VT, Cross FW, Palmer CE. An atlas of sensitivity to tuberculin, PPD-B, and histoplasmin in the United States. Am Rev Respir Dis 1969;99 Suppl:1-132.
7. Smith JA, Kauffman CA. Pulmonary fungal infections. Respirology 2012;17:913-26.
8. Wheat LJ. Improvements in diagnosis of histoplasmosis. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2006;6:1207-21.
9. Hage CA, Ribes JA, Wengenack NL, et al. A multicenter evaluation of tests for diagnosis of histoplasmosis. Clin Infect Dis 2011;53: 448-454.
10. Chu JH, Feudtner C, Heydon K, Walsh TJ, Zaoutis T. Hospitalizations for endemic mycoses: a population-based national study. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42: 822-825.

[authors: Skillman D, Riek L, Davis B, Harris JR, Nett RJ]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Indeed, it is important to know where a patient has been to assess the possibility of regional infections such as histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis. The exposure could have been years and even decades before. I personally participated in the care of a patient with disseminated histoplasmosis whose sole exposure was riding across the USA on a troop train during World War II, fully 35 years before presentation.

As a review, the following was obtained from Medscape (http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/299054-overview#showall):

"_Histoplasma capsulatum_ is a dimorphic fungus that remains in a mycelial form at ambient temperatures and grows as yeast at body temperature in mammals. Infection causes histoplasmosis. Although the fungus that causes histoplasmosis can be found in temperate climates throughout the world, it is endemic to the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River valleys in the United States. Internationally, the fungus is predominantly found in river valleys in North and Central America, eastern and southern Europe, and parts of Africa, eastern Asia, and Australia.

"The soil in areas endemic for histoplasmosis provides an acidic damp environment with high organic content that is good for mycelial growth. Highly infectious soil is found near areas inhabited by bats and birds. Birds cannot be infected by the fungus and do not transmit the disease; however, bird excretions contaminate the soil, thereby enriching the growth medium for the mycelium. In contrast, bats can become infected, and they transmit histoplasmosis through droppings. Contaminated soil can be potentially infectious for years. Outbreaks of histoplasmosis have been associated with construction and renovation activities that disrupt contaminated soil. In addition, travelers to endemic areas are at risk for histoplasmosis because airborne spores can travel hundreds of feet.

"Most individuals with histoplasmosis are asymptomatic. Those who develop clinical manifestations are usually immunocompromised or are exposed to a high quantity of inoculum. _Histoplasma_ species may remain latent in healed granulomas and recur, if there is impairment of cell-mediated immunity.

"Approximately 90 per cent of patients are asymptomatic. If symptoms develop, onset occurs 3-14 days after exposure. Fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, abdominal pain, and chills are common symptoms; usually, histoplasmosis is self-limited. Individuals exposed to a large inoculum may develop severe dyspnea resulting from diffuse pulmonary involvement. Joint pain and skin lesions occur in 5-6 per cent of patients, mostly in females. Enlarged hilar [the hilum is part of a gland or organ through which ducts, nerves, or blood vessels enter and leave] and mediastinal lymph nodes are present in 5-10 per cent of patients. Cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and/or chest pain may be present and are related to the degree of compression on the pulmonary airway and circulation. Paratracheal involvement may cause cough or dyspnea because of compression on the trachea or bronchi."

If 4 cases were diagnosed, since most cases are asymptomatic, there should have been many more infected Montanans. - Mod.LL

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/64j_.]
See Also
Histoplasmosis - USA: (IL) prison 20130920.1958172
Histoplasmosis, researchers - UK: ex Uganda, 2011 20130311.1581417
2012
---
Histoplasmosis - USA (02): travelers, comment 20120922.1304707
Histoplasmosis - USA: (NE) day camp attendees 20120920.1303165
2011
---
Histoplasmosis, researchers - UK: ex Uganda, alert 20110908.2738
2008
---
Histoplasmosis, travelers - USA ex El Salvador (02): background 20081222.4030
Histoplasmosis, travelers - USA ex El Salvador 20081219.3994
2006
---
Histoplasmosis, researchers - Italy ex Ecuador: alert 20060825.2399
2001
---
Histoplasmosis - Mexico (Acapulco) 20011016.2547
.................................................ll/je/sh
</body>
