<header id=019879>
Published Date: 2011-10-10 09:24:05 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (07)
Archive Number: 20111010.3034
</header>
<body id=019879>
ANTHRAX, HUMAN, 2001 - USA (07)
*******************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sun 9 Oct 2011
Source: The New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/10/science/10anthrax.html


Scientists' analysis disputes FBI closing of anthrax case
---------------------------------------------------------
A decade after wisps of anthrax sent through the mail killed 5 people,
sickened 17 others, and terrorized the nation, biologists and chemists
still disagree on whether federal investigators got the right man and
whether the FBI's long inquiry brushed aside important clues. Now, 3
scientists argue that distinctive chemicals found in the dried anthrax
spores -- including the unexpected presence of tin -- point to a high
degree of manufacturing skill, contrary to federal reassurances that
the attack germs were unsophisticated. The scientists make their case
in a coming issue of the Journal of Bioterrorism & Biodefense.

FBI documents reviewed by The New York Times show that bureau
scientists focused on tin early in their 8-year investigation, calling
it an "element of interest" and a potentially critical clue to the
criminal case. They later dropped their lengthy inquiry, never
mentioned tin publicly, and never offered any detailed account of how
they thought the powder had been made.

The new paper raises the prospect -- for the 1st time in a serious
scientific forum -- that the Army biodefense expert identified by the
FBI as the perpetrator, Bruce E Ivins, had help in obtaining his germ
weapons or conceivably was innocent of the crime.

Both the chairwoman of a National Academy of Science panel that spent
a year and a half reviewing the FBI's scientific work and the director
of a new review by the Government Accountability Office [GAO] said the
paper raised important questions that should be addressed. Alice P
Gast, president of Lehigh University and the head of the academy
panel, said that the paper "points out connections that deserve
further consideration." Dr Gast, a chemical engineer, said the
"chemical signatures" in the mailed anthrax and their potential value
to the criminal investigation had not been fully explored. "It just
wasn't pursued as vigorously as the microbiology," she said, alluding
to the analysis of micro-organisms. She also noted that the academy
panel suggested a full review of classified government research on
anthrax, which her panel never saw.

In interviews, the 3 authors said their analysis suggested that the
FBI might have pursued the wrong suspect and that the case should be
reopened. Their position may embolden calls for a national commission
to investigate the 1st major bioterrorist attack in American history.

But other scientists who reviewed the paper said they thought the tin
might be a random contaminant, not a clue to complex processing. And
the Justice Department has not altered its conclusion that the deadly
letters were mailed by Dr Ivins, an Army anthrax specialist who worked
at Fort Detrick, Maryland, and killed himself in 2008 as prosecutors
prepared to charge him.

Dean Boyd, a Justice Department spokesman, said the paper provided "no
evidence whatsoever that the spores used in the mailings were
produced" at a location other than Fort Detrick. He said investigators
believe Dr Ivins grew and dried the anthrax spores himself.
"Speculation regarding certain characteristics of the spores is just
that -- speculation," Mr Boyd said. "We stand by our conclusion."

The tin is surprising because it kills micro-organisms and is used in
antibacterial products. The authors of the paper say its presence in
the mailed anthrax suggests that the germs, after cultivation and
drying, got a specialized silicon coating, with tin as a chemical
catalyst. Such coatings, known in industry as microencapsulants, are
common in the manufacture of drugs and other products.

"It indicates a very special processing, and expertise," said Martin E
Hugh-Jones, lead author of the paper and a world authority on anthrax
at Louisiana State University. The deadly germs sent through the mail
to news organizations and 2 United States senators, he added, were
"far more sophisticated than needed." In addition to Dr Hugh-Jones,
the authors of the new paper are Barbara Hatch Rosenberg, a biologist,
and Stuart Jacobsen, a chemist; both have speculated publicly about
the case and criticized the FBI for years.

In 2008, days after Dr Ivins's suicide, the bureau made public a
sweeping but circumstantial case against him. Last year [2010], the
bureau formally closed the case, acknowledging that some scientific
questions were unanswered but asserting that the evidence against Dr
Ivins was overwhelming. Investigators found that the microbiologist
had worked unusual late-night hours in his lab in the days before each
of the 2 known anthrax mailings in September and October 2001; that he
often mailed letters and packages under assumed names; that he had a
history of homicidal threats and spoke of "Crazy Bruce" as a
personality that did things he later could not remember. Dr Ivins had
hidden from family and friends an obsession with a sorority -- Kappa
Kappa Gamma -- with an office near the Princeton, New Jersey, mailbox
where the letters were mailed. The FBI recorded Dr Ivins's speaking
ambiguously to a friend that he did "not have any recollection" of
mailing the letters, that he was "not a killer at heart" and that "I,
in my right mind, wouldn't do it."

Yet no evidence directly tied Dr Ivins to the crime. Some of the
scientist's former colleagues have argued that he could not have made
the anthrax and that investigators hounded a troubled man to death.
They noted that the FBI pursued several other suspects, most
notoriously another former Army scientist, Dr Steven J Hatfill, whom
the bureau eventually exonerated and paid a USD 4.6 million legal
settlement.

In its report last February [2011], the National Academy of Sciences
panel sharply criticized some of the FBI's scientific work, saying the
genetic link between the attack anthrax and a supply in Dr Ivins's lab
was "not as conclusive" as the bureau asserted.

If the authors of the new paper are correct about the silicon-tin
coating, it appears likely that Dr Ivins could not have made the
anthrax powder alone with the equipment he possessed, as the FBI
maintains. That would mean either that he got the powder from
elsewhere or that he was not the perpetrator. If Dr Ivins did not make
the powder, one conceivable source might be classified government
research on anthrax, carried out for years by the military and the
Central Intelligence Agency. Dr Ivins had ties to several researchers
who did such secret work.

The Government Accountability Office, the investigative arm of
Congress, is conducting its own review of the anthrax evidence. Nancy
Kingsbury, the official overseeing the project, said the agency had
spoken with the paper's authors and judged that "their questions are
reasonable."

Beyond the world of forensics, tin is a humdrum additive used to kill
micro-organisms in products like paint, wood preservatives, and even
toothpaste. But microbiologists say that the nutrients and additives
used to grow _Bacillus anthracis_, the anthrax bacteria, are typically
free of tin. So in late 2002, when the FBI found significant
quantities of tin in the mailed powders, it set out to find its
source. By 2003, the bureau was calling tin "an element of interest"
-- echoing its terminology for human suspects -- according to
disclosures culled from 9600 pages of FBI documents by The Times.

Over the years, the bureau performed hundreds of tests to explore
tin's use in microbiology and significance in the attack germs. It
also hunted for clues to how the spores had become laced with silicon,
which the United States had used decades ago as a coating in germ
weapons. In 2005, scientists at an internal FBI symposium called tin a
possible fingerprint of the attack germs.

After that, the forensic clue disappeared from public discussion,
except for a passing mention in a 2009 press release. "Although the
chemical fingerprint of the spores is interesting," the release said,
"it was not relevant to the investigation."

In the end, the FBI -- without alluding to its private tin labors --
declared publicly that the attack germs had no special coating, saying
that conclusion supported its finding that Dr Ivins had grown and
dried the spores alone, using standard equipment in his lab at Fort
Detrick.

Several anthrax scientists who reviewed the new paper at the request
of The Times said they believed it neglected the possibility that the
tin and silicon were meaningless contaminants rather than
sophisticated additives. Johnathan L Kiel, a retired Air Force
scientist who worked on anthrax for many years, said that the spores
"pick up everything" and that the silicon might be residue of a
commercial product used on laboratory glassware to keep spores from
sticking. He said tin might even be picked up from metal lab
containers, though he has not tested that idea. "It doesn't have to be
some super-secret process," Dr Kiel said. Other experts suggested that
the tin might have come from anti-foam products, disinfectants, or
water.

The trouble with such conjecture is that the FBI spent years testing
for tin in microbiology lab supplies -- and reported none, according
to bureau documents.

Dr Gast, the head of the National Academy of Sciences panel, noted
that her group strongly recommended that future investigations of the
attacks examine the government's classified work on anthrax. She
called access to secret records "an important aspect of providing more
clarity on what we know and what we don't know."

[Byline: William J Broad, Scott Shane]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Sun 9 Oct 2011
Source: The Baltimore Sun [edited]
http://www.baltimoresun.com/entertainment/tv/z-on-tv-blog/bal-frontline-anthrax-files--fbi-suicide-fort-detrick-scientist-20111009,0,4090742.story


Frontline's 'Anthrax Files' takes hard look at FBI role in suicide of
Ft Detrick scientist
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Tuesday night [11 Oct 2011] at 9, the series [Public Television's
Frontline] revisits Ft Detrick in Frederick, Maryland, and the case of
anthrax researcher Bruce Ivins who killed himself in 2008 as the FBI
zeroed in on him as its prime suspect in the case of deadly envelopes
of anthrax sent through the mail.

According to this hard-edged report done in partnership with McClatchy
Newspapers and Propublica, the FBI did more than zero in. Under
tremendous pressure to solve the case that started in 2001 with
anthrax mailed to US senators and network anchors, the agency squeezed
Ivins hard -- using every trick in the book to get a confession out of
him even as he insisted on his innocence to the end.

Ivins was a troubled guy with some distinctive kinks, the report
acknowledges, but even FBI consultants in the case now admit that the
agency overstated its evidence and never found a smoking gun to prove
the researcher's guilt. In fact, evidence was revealed last summer
[2011] that shows Ivins did not have the equipment needed to make the
powdery kind of anthrax sent through the mail. That didn't stop the
FBI then -- or now -- in acting like it found its man.

"The Anthrax Files" is chilling report on several fronts. First, it is
a reminder of what paranoid and scary times have been living though
since 2001 when the envelopes first appeared -- and the horrible
events we just commemorated took place on 11 Sep 2001. These are
indeed dark times, and with the economy getting worse and worse, there
seems to be no light anywhere in sight.

Second, the report shows how a federal agency can shred an
individual's life -- with or without the proper evidence to convict.
"The Anthrax Files" suggests that anyone with the psychological issues
Ivins had might have cracked under the weight of the FBI invading his
privacy, exposing his secrets, and ultimately getting him kicked out
of the community of researchers that he called home at Ft Detrick.

And finally, this is a chilling report, because if Ivins was not the
person who sent the anthrax, then that killer is still on the loose.
And we are left with an FBI that not only failed to solve such a huge
case, but also overstated and maybe lied about what it did
accomplish.

[Byline: David Zurawik]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The joint paper is due to be published in mid-November 2011 by the
Journal of Bioterrorism & Biodefense
(http://www.omicsonline.org/SpecialissueJBTBD.php).

There are 2 aspects to this paper; [1] It proposes a hypothesis as to
the nature of the anthrax spores in the letters, that is, that they
were microencapsulated. It would be very straightforward for the GAO
committee to test this hypothesis and see if the test product matches
either of the letter content products -- 2 preparations were used, one
coarse, the other more refined. This would also efficiently deal with
the criticisms voiced by the Department of Justice in defending their
position, which in fact are addressed in our paper. [2] Then, if we
are correct, it would be straightforward to examine the necessary
invoices by the companies producing the relevant chemicals in, say,
1999-2001, for laboratories working with _B. anthracis_ and check
quarterly and annual progress reports of relevant projects to the
funding agency or agencies. The latter would contain names, ranks, and
serial numbers of personnel involved.

And lastly, I would like to point out that the 2nd posting of
anthrax-spore letters (to Senators Leahy and Daschle) was on 9 Oct
2001, 4 days after Bob Stevens had died while under treatment for
pneumonic anthrax and reported widely. The perpetrator(s) knew then
that further deaths were not unlikely. He or they committed murder, it
was no longer a 'political' statement. - Mod.MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (06): comment 20110914.2798
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (05): possible chronic symptoms 20110913.2788
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (03): more questions 20110521.1545
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): ongoing questions 20110223.0601
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: Nat'l Research Council rep. 20110216.0511
2010
----
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (06) 20100921.3407
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (05) 20100424.1326
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (04) 20100324.0933
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (03) 20100305.0727
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): FBI case closed 20100219.0575
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA 20100125.0281
and more back to September 2001
.................................................lm/mhj/mj/mpp
</body>
