<header id=019385>
Published Date: 2021-07-10 18:16:03 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Scombroid fish poisoning - Syria: (LA)
Archive Number: 20210710.8509745
</header>
<body id=019385>
SCOMBROID FISH POISONING - SYRIA: (LATAKIA)
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 8 Jul 2021
Source: Shaam Times [in Arabic, trans., edited]
https://bit.ly/3e8iA5Q


Jableh National Hospital received 10 food poisoning cases during the past week due to eating palmida fish. A source at Jableh National Hospital told Al-Khobar TV, "About 10 cases of food poisoning arrived at the hospital during the past week due to eating palmida fish."

The source explained: "They were provided with the necessary first aid, including anti-allergic drugs and gastric lavage, and they were placed under observation for a period of time before they were discharged from the hospital."

The source stated that the names of these cases are [AA] age 31, [NA], 45, [RA] 21, [MA] 27, [SD] 59, [RD] 36, [IB] 9, [AB] 12, [MI] 45, [TI] 18.

Residents buy this type of fish due to its large presence in the markets and the prices suitable for their pockets.

The official of poisonings in the Latakia Health Directorate, Dr. Louay Saeed, had previously told Al-Khobar TV, you should not panic about cases of food allergy due to eating palmida fish.

Regarding the symptoms of food allergy to palmida fish, Dr. Said stated, "The patient suffers from itching, urticaria, slight shortness of breath and abdominal pain with diarrhea and redness of the face."

Dr. Said added: "Since the prices in the fish market are governed by supply and demand, and due to the availability of palmida in large quantities and its prices are relatively low compared to other types of fish, which encouraged the majority to buy it."

Dr. Saeed confirmed that food allergy is an accidental allergic reaction to eating fish of the type "Blemida large," which causes allergic reactions to some people due to the pre-histamine it contains.

Dr. Saeed called on "people who are allergic to pre-histamine (pro-histamine) found in large palmida fish to boil the fish half-boiled before cooking it, in order to reduce the effect of histamine that causes allergy."

Dr. Saeed pointed out: "Other causes of allergies are the delay in cooking some types of fish that are frozen and melted, as the pre-histamine in it turns into histamine causes allergies," noting that "poor storage of fish leads to an increase in cases food allergy."

Dr. Saeed called on "people not to buy fish unless the source and type are known, and not to buy chopped fish because there is a possibility of cheating in it."

Dr. Saeed added: "The fish should also be cooked immediately after it has been caught, and it should not be long since it was left uncooked or placed in the refrigerator for a long time."

Dr. Said continued: "Frozen fish must be cooked immediately after removing the ice, and for palmida fish, it must be cleaned well and its blood removed completely in order to avoid the effects of allergy."

It is worth noting the Latakia governorate witnessed during the past year several deaths as a result of eating poisonous balloon fish (puffer).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This fish appears to be a relative of tuna, sometimes measuring up to 80 cm [31.5 in] and it has a wide mouth and sharp teeth. It is fished from late-spring to early-summer and again at the end of September, when it can weigh up to 5 or 6 kilos [11-13 lbs]. It is also likely it is related to the scombroid group of fish which are known for the histamine in their various parts of the fish.

"Scombroid poisoning is a type of food intoxication caused by the consumption of scombroid and scombroid-like marine fish species that have begun to spoil with the growth of particular types of food bacteria. Fish most commonly involved are members of the Scombridae family (tunas and mackerels), and a few non-scombroid relatives (bluefish, dolphin or mahi-mahi, and amberjacks). A few additional species have been implicated, but they are of less concern relative to popular fish consumption. The suspect toxin is an elevated level of histamine generated by bacterial degradation of substances in the muscle protein. This natural spoilage process is thought to release additional by-products which potentiate the toxic effect. The potential toxins are not destroyed by freezing, cooking, smoking, curing or canning."

"Symptoms of scombroid poisoning can become evident within minutes to 2 hours following consumption. This rapid onset is one reason scombroid poisoning may be reported more often than many other food poisonings which react much slower. Initial signs suggest an allergic response with facial flushing and sweating, burning-peppery taste sensations about the mouth and throat, dizziness, nausea and headache. These initial symptoms can advance to facial rash, hives, edema, short term diarrhea and abdominal cramps. Severe cases may blur vision and cause respiratory stress and swelling of the tongue. Symptoms usually last for approximately 4 to 6 hours and rarely exceed 1 to 2 days.

"Symptoms for scombroid poisoning can be easily confused with an allergy or other form of food poisoning, and vice versa. For example, some symptoms for scombroid poisoning are similar to ciguatera, another form of marine fish poisoning. Distinguishing these illnesses can be complicated, particularly about warm water regions."

"Remember potential scombrotoxic fish belong to a particular group of species that have been allowed to initially spoil. These species should always receive special care in handling, washing, and proper icing, refrigeration or immediate freezing to prevent bacterial growth and spoilage. Studies have demonstrated toxic histamine levels can be generated within less than 6 to 12 hours exposure without ice or refrigeration. This problem is of particular concern immediately after catch aboard a commercial or recreational boat. Likewise, the recreational catch lying on a warm dock or beach is prone to histamine production in certain species. The adverse consequence is not severe but discomforting and alarming enough to warrant a little extra care. Prevention is simple and preferable to treatment which is similar as used for allergic reactions. Common advice from physicians includes treatments with antihistamines" (Source: https://www.fda.gov/food/seafood-guidance-documents-regulatory-information/scombrotoxin-poisoning-and-decomposition).

Histamine in Fish and Fishery Products
--------------------------------------
"This information is intended for food business operators, enforcement officers and other interested parties. It:
- Provides information on the causes of histamine food poisoning linked to fish and fishery products
- Includes the relevant legislation governing acceptable limits of histamine in fish and fishery products
- Provides information on how to minimise the risk of histamine build-up in fish and fishery products

"What is histamine? Histamine is a biogenic amine which is a naturally occurring substance in the human body. Histamine is derived from the breakdown (decarboxylation) of the amino acid histidine. It has important physiological functions related to local immune responses, gastric acid secretion and neuromodulation. Histamine is involved in the body's inflammation response and, if elevated levels are ingested, it can produce symptoms similar to that of an allergic reaction.

"What is histamine food poisoning? Histamine or "Scombroid fish" poisoning is a foodborne illness most commonly caused by consuming certain species of marine fish (e.g., tuna, herring, mackerel) that have naturally high levels of histamine and possibly other biogenic amines in their tissues. After fish, cheeses are the foods most commonly associated with histamine poisoning. However, histamine production can occur in other foods such as fermented foods, e.g., wine, dry sausage, sauerkraut, miso, and soy sauce. See our FAQ on Histamine in Foods other than Fish and Fishery products (https://www.fsai.ie/faq/histamine_in_food.html).

"What are the symptoms of illness? Onset of symptoms of histamine food poisoning can range from several minutes to several hours following ingestion of toxin. Typically, the average incubation period before onset of illness is approximately one hour. Severity of illness varies, depending on factors such as the level of exposure and the susceptibility of the affected individual. Typically observed symptoms are:
- Nausea
- Malaise
- Vomiting
- Diarrhoea
- Abdominal cramps
- Headaches
- Skin rash
- Flushing
- Burning sensation of the mouth and lips
- A peppery taste sensation
- Hives
- Itching
- Hypotension

"How is histamine produced? Histamine is produced when bacteria that naturally occur in the skin, gills and gut of fish break down histidine, an amino acid found in the muscles of certain fish species that contain naturally high levels of this amino acid (mackerel/herring/sardines/tuna). The production of histamine is directly related to the mishandling of food as a result of storage at incorrect temperatures. Histidine decarboxylase, the enzyme responsible for breaking down histidine into histamine, can remain active even after the bacteria responsible for producing it have been inactivated or killed. The enzyme continues histamine production slowly at refrigeration temperatures and remains stable if frozen, thus allowing it to rapidly recommence activity after thawing. Although the enzyme that produces histamine can be inactivated by cooking, once histamine has been produced, it cannot be eliminated by normal cooking or freezing temperatures, and its toxicity remains intact.

"What are the signs of food spoilage that can result in high levels of histamine? Harmful levels of histamine can build up in fish before any signs of spoilage develop, such as a bad smell or taste. For these reasons, control strategies focus on prevention through the use of strict temperature control throughout the food chain.

"Which bacteria are involved? A wide range of bacteria are capable of producing histamine. Examples include _Morganella morganii_, _Klebsiella_ spp., _Pseudomonas_, _Clostridium_, _Citrobacter freundii_ and more. Many of these bacteria are found naturally in fish environments.

"How is histamine controlled? Strict control of the cold chain is essential to prevent the formation of histamine. Fish must be chilled immediately after catching, as this is the highest risk period for bacterial growth and histamine production. The integrity of the cold chain must be protected throughout all processing stages (catching/transport/delivery/sale) in order to control histamine production and ensure maximum product shelf life. Records of cold chain integrity should be kept at all stages of the food chain.

"A food business operator should:
- Store fish frozen or at 0 deg C [32 F] (on ice) as per the requirements in Regulation 853/2004 (as amended)
- Examine supplier temperature records to ensure fish was rapidly chilled after catching
- Examine supplier records to ensure that a temperature approaching that of melting ice were maintained throughout storage and transport
- Ensure that fish is stored immediately on receipt and that temperatures of 0 deg C [32 F] (on ice) are maintained at all times
- Keep records of all temperatures throughout the food chain to ensure compliance
- Take account of relevant information accompanying incoming product such as date of minimum durability, date of freezing or first freezing (unprocessed fishery products), date of production and date of freezing if different from date of production (frozen products of animal origin)
- Assign an appropriate shelf life.

"Can processing technologies prevent histamine production? Bacteria associated with histamine production are readily found in salt water. As such, many of these bacteria are halotolerant (salt resistant) or halophilic (salt loving) and some are capable of producing histamine under acidic conditions (low pH). Therefore, histamine production is possible even during processes such as smoking, brining, salting, fermenting and drying. Histamine already produced can also survive these processes. In addition, vacuum packaging is not an effective method of preventing the production of histamine.

"What histamine levels are harmful in foods? Levels of above 200 mg/kg (ppm) have been associated with human illness. However, levels as low as 50 mg/kg have known to cause illness, but this is uncommon. Most cases of illness caused by histamine in fish have been above 200 mg/kg, and often above 500 mg/kg.

"What are the legal limits for histamine in food? Commission Regulation (EC) No 2073/2005 on microbiological criteria for foodstuffs (as amended) lays down standards for fishery products which are associated with high levels of histamine. If a product exceeds the legal limits laid down in the Regulation, then a withdrawal or recall of the product or batch of foodstuff from the market should be issued in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002" (Source: https://www.fsai.ie/faq/histamine_fish.html). - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map of Latakia, Syria: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8509745,68456]
See Also
Scombroid fish poisoning - Europe (03): Luxemburg ex Netherlands, ex Sri Lanka 20180529.5824549
Scombroid fish poisoning - Australia: (QL) tuna, alert 20180214.5628628
Scombroid fish poisoning - USA (02): (CO) susp. 20171119.5452692
Scombroid fish poisoning - Europe (02): Spanish tuna 20170928.5347178
Scombroid fish poisoning - Europe: spanish tuna, alert, recall 20170511.5028650
Scombroid fish poisoning - USA: imported fish ex Viet Nam, risk 20170420.4982806
2016
----
Scombroid fish poisoning - Singapore (02): ex Thailand, canned tuna, recall 20160926.4516815
Scombroid fish poisoning - Singapore: ex Thailand, canned tuna, recall, RFI 20160921.4503707
Scombroid fish poisoning - India: alert 20160824.4439217
Scombroid poisoning, cheddar cheese - UK: RFI 20160108.3920639
2015
----
Scombroid fish poisoning - Australia: (NS) canned tuna 20150301.3193848
Scombroid fish poisoning - Italy: (UM) 20150830.3612341
Scombroid fish poisoning - Australia: (NS) canned tuna 20150301.3193848
2014
----
Foodborne illness - Indonesia: (Bali) fatal, scombroid susp 20140205.2254610
2013
----
Scombroid fish poisoning - China: (GD) mackerel 20130823.1898159
Scombroid fish poisoning - UK (Scotland) tuna sandwiches 20130405.1623033
.................................................tg/rd/jh
</body>
