<header id=048900>
Published Date: 2016-12-12 04:59:20 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Equine viral arteritis: genetic vulnerability
Archive Number: 20161212.4691366
</header>
<body id=048900>
EQUINE VIRAL ARTERITIS: GENETIC VULNERABILITY
*********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[There is a correction of this report: Equine viral arteritis: genetic vulnerability, corr 20161212.4693357
Coggins blood test is used for equine infectious anemia (EIA) while serum neutralization is used for equine viral arteritis (EVA). - Mod.TG]

Date: Sat 10 Dec 2016
Source: Horse Talk [edited]
http://www.horsetalk.co.nz/2016/12/10/genetic-vulnerability-troublesome-disease/#axzz4SXgD1Xai


Researchers have identified a genetic vulnerability that makes stallions infected by the equine arteritis virus more likely to become carriers.

The troublesome pathogen, which causes equine viral arteritis, can be detected with a Coggins blood test. The disease rose to global prominence in 1984 during an outbreak in Kentucky. Infected horses have been recorded in many countries.

Clinical signs vary. The typical picture is a fever, upper respiratory tract inflammation and discharges, weakness, depression, anorexia, limb swelling, sheath and scrotal swelling in stallions, and abortion in pregnant mares, usually from 2 months of gestation onwards. However, many cases present with little more than a loss of appetite.

It can also cause severe respiratory disease and inflammation of the small intestine in young foals.

Severity tends to be greater in old, young, or debilitated animals.

Outbreaks result in significant economic losses to the equine industry due to high rates of foal loss in pregnant mares, death in young foals and establishment of the carrier state in stallions. The virus is maintained in the horse population between breeding seasons by persisting in these carrier stallions.

Fresh research at the University of Kentucky's Maxwell H Gluck Equine Research Center has shed new light on factors involved in stallions becoming carriers.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Equine viral arteritis (EVA) is a contagious viral disease of equids caused by equine arteritis virus (EAV), an RNA virus classified in the family _Arteriviridae_. Only one major serotype of the virus has been identified so far. Equine arteritis virus is found in horse populations in many countries worldwide.

The majority of naturally acquired infections with EAV are subclinical. Where present, clinical signs of EVA can vary in range and severity. The disease is characterised principally by fever, depression, anorexia, dependent oedema, especially of the limbs, scrotum and prepuce in the stallion, conjunctivitis, an urticarial-type skin reaction, abortion and, rarely, a fulminating pneumonia, enteritis or pneumo-enteritis in young foals. Apart from mortality in young foals, the case-fatality rate in outbreaks of EVA is very low. Affected horses almost invariably make complete clinical recoveries. A long-term carrier state can occur in a variable percentage of infected stallions, but not in mares, geldings, or sexually immature colts.

Many horses are either asymptomatic or exhibit flu-like symptoms for a short period of time. An abortion in pregnant mares is often the 1st, and in some cases, the only sign of the disease. EVA has been confirmed in a variety of horse breeds, with the highest infection rate found in adult Standardbreds.

Breeders, racehorse owners, and show horse owners all have strong economic reasons to prevent and control this disease. While it does not kill mature horses, EVA can eliminate an entire breeding season by causing numerous mares to abort. In addition, US horses that test positive for EVA antibodies and horse semen from EVA-infected horses can be barred from entering foreign countries. As the horse industry becomes increasingly internationalized, nearly all major horse-breeding countries are including in their import policies measures to reduce the risk of EVA. The US Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's (APHIS) Veterinary Services (VS) program provides the equine industry with EVA diagnostic and surveillance support.

History
-------
More than a century ago, a disease fitting the clinical description of what we now call EVA was reported in European veterinary literature. However, the virus was not isolated from horses in [the US] until 1953 during an epidemic of abortions and respiratory disease. The most recent EVA epidemic occurred in 1984 when this disease affected 41 thoroughbred breeding farms in Kentucky. This outbreak brought to light 2 very important findings about EVA: the efficiency with which an acutely infected stallion could venereally transmit the virus and the high carrier rate that immediately occurred in stallions following natural infection with the virus.

Transmission
------------
EVA is primarily a respiratory disease. Particles from acutely infected horses' nasal discharges are inhaled, often during the movement of horses at sales, shows, and racetracks. Horses are herd animals that tend to commingle, and this close contact facilitates the spread of the virus.

However, unlike other respiratory diseases, EVA can also be transmitted venereally during breeding, either naturally or by artificial insemination. When a mare, gelding, or sexually immature colt contracts the disease, the animal will naturally eliminate the virus and develop a strong immunity to reinfection. On the contrary, infected stallions are very likely to become virus carriers for a long time. Once stallions are in the carrier state, they transmit the virus to mares during breeding.

While the mare will shed the virus easily, a pregnant mare infected with EVA may pass the virus to her unborn fetus. Depending on the stage of pregnancy, the fetus can become infected, die, and be aborted. If the infected foal is born, it will only live for a few days.

Clinical signs
--------------
Many horses infected with EVA are asymptomatic. When symptoms do occur in the acute stage of the disease, they can include any or all of the following: fever, nasal discharge, loss of appetite, respiratory distress, skin rash, muscle soreness, conjunctivitis, and depression. Other clinical signs in infected animals are swelling around the eyes and ocular discharge, swollen limbs, swollen genitals in stallions, and swollen mammary glands in mares. Abortion in pregnant mares is also a symptom of EVA. Abortion rates in EVA-infected mares can be as low as 10 percent or as high as 70 percent.

Diagnosis
---------
Horse owners should suspect EVA when respiratory symptoms accompany an abortion in a mare. Since the clinical signs of EVA are similar to those of other respiratory disease, and no characteristic lesions are in EVA-aborted fetuses, only diagnostic tests can confirm the disease. Virus isolation can be attempted from swabs of the nose, throat, or eyes; semen, placentas, or fetal tissue; and blood samples. However, the most common method of diagnosis is testing blood for the virus' neutralizing antibodies that cause EVA. While the presence of these antibodies alone does not indicate active infection, it does indicate EVA exposure has occurred. Very high levels of antibodies on a single sample or a rising antibody titer from paired blood samples collected 14 to 28 days apart indicate active infection.

Treatment
---------
While there is no specific treatment for EVA, treatment should include rest and in selected cases, antibiotics, which may decrease the risk of secondary bacterial infection. Adult horses recover completely from the clinical disease. However, the virus commonly persists in the accessory glands of recovered stallions, so these carrier stallions continue to shed the virus for years and remain a significant source of infection.

Prevention and control
----------------------
Fortunately, there is a way the industry can work to prevent and control EVA. A safe, effective, and low cost avirulent live virus is now available. Combining this vaccine with isolation of the vaccinated animal from non-infected horses can prevent the spread of EVA. Since properly vaccinated EVA-negative stallions do not become carriers, all EVA-negative colts less than 270 days old should be vaccinated. The vaccine is not approved for use in pregnant mares.

Blood samples for EVA testing should be collected from all horses before breeding, and virus isolation should be performed on imported semen before use. Strict hygiene and disinfection of instruments and equipment are essential to minimize spread of the virus. EVA-negative mares should be bred only to EVA-negative, non-carrier stallions. If blood test results are positive in a stallion, but there is no official documentation of negative EVA status prior to vaccination, the stallion must be tested for the presence of a carrier state. Virus isolation can be attempted on the semen from 2 separate ejaculations, or by mating 2 EVA-negative mares with the stallion. 28 days after breeding, mares' blood should be tested for the development of the neutralizing antibodies to the EVA virus. Carrier stallions should be bred only to EVA-positive mares or mares that are properly vaccinated. When breeding an EVA-positive or carrier stallion to an EVA-negative, vaccinated mare, isolate both horses for 24 hours after breeding to prevent mechanical spread of EVA from voided semen. If this is the 1st time the mare has been bred to a carrier stallion, she should be isolated from other horses for an additional 21 days due to potential virus shedding. All vaccinated horses should receive yearly boosters to protect against infection and, for the stallions, to prevent the development of a carrier state. In a generation or 2, these practices could all but eliminate the population of carrier stallions.

The above and additional information on EAV is available from the USDA at https://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/animal_diseases/eva/downloads/eva-umr.pdf and in chapter 2.5.10 of OIE's Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals 2012, at http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.05.10_EVA.pdf.

While we know what the disease presents as and its effect on the horse, this may be the 1st time that a genetic predisposition toward this virus has been investigated.

Portions of this comment were borrowed from ProMED-moderator colleague AS, and portions were extracted from https://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/animal_diseases/eva/downloads/fs_equine_eva.pdf - Mod.TG]
See Also
2015
----
Equine viral arteritis - Spain 20150820.3591936
2012
----
Equine viral arteritis - UK: (England) OIE 20121005.1326353
2011
----
Equine viral arteritis - France: (BD, HE) RFI 20110713.2116
2010
----
Equine viral arteritis - UK (02): (England), OIE 20101220.4481
Equine viral arteritis - Argentina (03): (BA) ex Netherlands 20101117.4173
Equine viral arteritis - UK, OIE 20100805.2650
Equine viral arteritis - Argentina (02): (BA) OIE 20100510.1526
Equine viral arteritis - Argentina ex Holland 20100509.1513
2008
----
Equine viral arteritis - Israel (02): OIE 20081111.3547
2007
----
Equine viral arteritis - France 20070714.2260
2006
----
Equine viral arteritis - USA (NM) (02) 20061121.3317
2005
----
Equine viral arteritis - UK: OIE 20050131.0335
2002
----
Equine viral arteritis 20020209.3523
1999
----
Equine viral arteritis - New Zealand (02) 19990805.1350
Equine viral arteritis - New Zealand 19990802.1319
.................................................sb/tg/mj/ml/lm
</body>
