<header id=018631>
Published Date: 2015-11-29 05:23:43 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Enzootic bovine leukosis - Canada
Archive Number: 20151129.3826150
</header>
<body id=018631>
ENZOOTIC BOVINE LEUKOSIS - CANADA
*********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 26 Nov 2015
Source: Producer [edited]
http://www.producer.com/2015/11/cancer-causing-cattle-disease-increasing-across-canada-2/


Infection rates for bovine leukosis, which can cause cancer in cattle, are growing.

"(Producers) should be worried, and they should do something about it because, as I said, the prevalence is high," said Omid Nekouei, a PhD candidate of veterinary epidemiology at the Atlantic Veterinary College.

Nekouei, who is working on a thesis study on bovine leukosis, said he has found that the number of dairy cattle with the disease has increased in the last 15 to 20 years. Bovine leukosis is a virus that can cause a form of cancer called bovine lymphosarcoma.

"The lymphocyte is a white blood cell in our bloodstream, and cattle have the same type of white blood cells," said John Campbell, head of the large animal clinical sciences department at the University of Saskatchewan's Western College of Veterinary Medicine.

"Basically, this virus can cause a proliferation of those white blood cells, just like a leukemia in people." The proliferation can cause enlarged lymph nodes in cattle and can also occur in the heart, stomach and reproductive tract.

Cattle can have the bovine leukosis gene and never develop cancer, which is usually found only in older animals. The disease is commonly spread through blood contamination. "If you injected one cow and then injected another cow with one needle, you could potentially spread the virus from one animal to another," Campbell said. The disease can also be transmitted in the uterus of the cow to the calf and through milk from cow to calf.

Bovine leukosis is more prominent in dairy herds, which Campbell said could be because dairy cattle are sold and moved around more often than beef animals and because multiple dairy calves are fed milk from the same cow.

David Kelton, research chair in dairy cattle health at Dairy Farmers of Ontario, said the disease's major economic effect is on trade. "(European countries have) been very aggressive over the years at identifying diseases, and especially if they're present at a very low level in their population, that they've worked to get rid of them." Kenton believes Canada has not fought to eliminate the disease because there has been no major effect on humans or the beef and dairy industries.

However, an American study recently linked bovine leukosis to breast cancer in humans. The study, which was explained in an article published in September [2015] called Exposure to Bovine Leukemia Virus is Associated with Breast Cancer: A Case-Control Study, found that breast cancer incidence is markedly higher in countries with raw milk consumption. It also suggested that humans could have been introduced to the bovine leukosis gene. "This certainly isn't a (definitive) study, but it certainly raises the question," Kelton said.

It's not certain how many cows are affected with bovine leukosis in Canada, but the 1st national dairy study is being completed this year [2015].

[Byline: Ashley Robinson]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

["Lymphosarcoma in cattle may be sporadic or result from infection with bovine leukemia virus (BLV); the latter is often referred to as an enzootic bovine leukosis. Sporadic lymphosarcoma in cattle is unrelated to infection with BLV. Despite the lack of association, animals with sporadic lymphosarcoma may possibly be infected with the virus. Sporadic lymphosarcoma manifests in three main forms: juvenile, thymic, and cutaneous. Juvenile lymphosarcoma occurs most often in animals under 6 months old, thymic lymphosarcoma affects cattle 6-24 months old, and cutaneous lymphosarcoma is most common in cattle 1-3 years old.

Enzootic bovine leukosis is caused by BLV, an exogenous C-type oncogenic retrovirus of the BLV-human T-lymphotropic virus group. BLV has a stable genome, does not cause chronic viremia, and has no preferred site of proviral integration. Despite the lack of preferred proviral integration sites, the tumors generated by the virus in a single individual are typically monoclonal and have a single integration site. The virus escapes the immune response by low levels of viral replication. It appears that replication is blocked at the transcriptional level, but the mechanism is not completely understood.

The prevalence of BLV infection varies from country to country. Many European countries, Australia, and New Zealand have eradication programs in place that have led to negligible rates of BLV infection. Although voluntary control programs are in place in the USA, prevalence is high compared with much of the rest of the world. The most recent surveys in the USA estimate that 44 percent of dairy and 10 percent of beef cattle are infected with the virus. Prevalence tends to increase on dairies with increasing herd size, while the converse is true in beef cattle. In general, the prevalence of viral infection increases with age.

Cattle are infected with BLV through the transfer of blood and blood products that contain infected lymphocytes. Once infected, cattle develop a lifelong antibody response, primarily to the gp51 envelope protein and the p24 capsid protein. B lymphocytes harbor the integrated provirus but rarely express viral proteins on their cell surface. The exact site of viral replication and expression that drives the immune response remains elusive.

Under experimental conditions, most routes of viral exposure can successfully transmit infection. However, many of these settings are unlikely to be encountered naturally. Many bodily fluids, including urine, feces, saliva, respiratory secretions, semen, uterine fluids, and embryos, have been examined for their ability to transmit BLV and are considered to be noninfectious. Only on rare occasion has virus been found in these fluids. Colostrum from BLV-positive cows contains virus and has been found to be infectious experimentally. However, colostrum also contains large amounts of antibody, and it is believed that the protective effects of colostral antibody outweigh the infectious potential when colostrum is administered in a normal fashion.

Most BLV transmission is horizontal. Close contact between BLV-negative and BLV-positive cattle is thought to be a risk factor. Many common farm practices have been implicated in viral transmission, including tattooing, dehorning, rectal palpation, injections, and blood collection. Vectors such as tabanids and other large biting flies also may transmit the virus. Vertical transmission may occur transplacentally from an infected dam to her fetus, intrapartum by contact with infected blood, or postpartum from the dam to the calf through ingestion of infected colostrum. Any material that is blood contaminated or lymphocyte rich has the potential to infect animals with BLV.

Clinical signs associated with development of lymphosarcoma are highly variable, because the affected organ(s) will dictate the predominant clinical signs.

Juvenile lymphosarcoma is often characterized by a sudden onset of diffuse lymphoid hyperplasia with or without visceral organ involvement. Weight loss, fever, tachycardia, dyspnea, bloat, and posterior paresis have all been described with this form of lymphosarcoma. Profound lymphocytosis (over 50 000/uL) often accompanies this fatal form of bovine lymphosarcoma. Thymic lymphosarcoma may involve the cervical or intrathoracic thymus, or both. Clinical signs associated with this form of lymphosarcoma depend heavily on the location and size of the tumor. A cervical swelling may be evident. Dyspnea, bloat, jugular distention, tachycardia, anterior edema, and fever have been documented. The affected cell population is an immature, poorly differentiated lymphocyte. Cutaneous lymphosarcoma presents as cutaneous plaques, 1-5 cm in diameter, on the neck, back, rump, and thighs. Regional lymph nodes may also be enlarged. This form of lymphosarcoma may undergo spontaneous remission; however, relapses may occur.

Lymphosarcoma is often included on the differential diagnosis list for many diseases because of the wide range of clinical findings. Viral infection is diagnosed by serology or virology, persistent lymphocytosis is identified by hematology, and neoplastic tumors are identified by histologic examination of biopsies. Positive serology or virology for BLV confirms viral infection but not the presence of lymphosarcoma.

Serology is the most common and reliable way to diagnose infection with BLV. Agar gel immunodiffusion is still recognized by most countries as the official import/export test, but ELISA is the most common test for routine diagnostic use. Serology is unreliable in calves that have ingested colostrum from BLV-positive cows because of the passive acquisition of maternal antibodies that typically wane by 4-6 months of age. PCR is a sensitive and specific assay for diagnosis of BLV infection in peripheral blood lymphocytes. This test can identify proviral DNA of BLV in the lymphocytes of infected animals and differentiate positive from negative calves in the presence of maternal antibodies.

The diagnosis of lymphosarcoma must be made by cytology or histopathology. Cytologic diagnosis is sometimes difficult because of the frequency of blood contamination of the aspirates.

There is no treatment for viral infection or for lymphosarcoma in cattle, although parenteral corticosteroids can transiently decrease the severity of clinical signs. Eradication programs have been developed but success has been variable, primarily because of the expense and high prevalence of infection among cattle in the USA relative to the economic cost of disease. The most commonly recommended eradication protocol is as follows: 1) identify infected animals using a serologic test, 2) cull seropositive animals immediately, 3) retest the herd in 30-60 days, 4) use PCR to test young calves and as a complementary test to clarify test results in herds with a low prevalence of infection, and 5) repeat testing and cull until the entire herd tests negative. Testing is then repeated every 6 months. The herd is declared free when there have been no positive tests for 2 years. Additions to the herd should have 2 negative tests 30 and 60 days before arrival.

Eliminating the movement of blood from infected animals to naive animals is the cornerstone of prevention protocols. In calves, feeding colostrum from seronegative cows is often advocated. However, most epidemiologic evidence suggests that the protective effect of colostral antibody outweighs the risk of infections, particularly in high prevalence herds. The replacement of whole milk feeding with high-quality milk replacer may also be considered. Bloody milk should never be fed to calves.

Cautery or other bloodless methods of dehorning should be used. Equipment used for castration, tattooing, ear tagging, or implanting should be adequately cleaned and disinfected between animals.

Transmission can be decreased in adult cattle by changing rectal sleeves in between cows. Artificial insemination or embryo transfer (using negative recipients) may limit transmission. In beef herds, the use of a negative bull may limit transmission, but natural service is an uncommon method of viral transmission unless breeding is traumatic.

Additional recommendations include disinfection of equipment that has come in contact with blood or body tissue. Single use, disposable needles should always be used for blood collection and IM injections. It is preferable to use single-use disposable needles for vaccination, but the risk of transmitting BLV virus via SC vaccination is low. Handling facilities that become contaminated with blood should be cleaned between animals. Fly control helps minimize the potential for tabanid-associated transmission. Blood transfusions and vaccines containing blood, such as those used for babesiosis and anaplasmosis, are particularly potent ways to spread the disease, and donors must be carefully screened."

This comment was extracted from: http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/generalized_conditions/bovine_leukosis/overview_of_bovine_leukosis.html. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3826150,12.]
See Also
2010
----
Enzootic bovine leukosis - UK (02): NOT, antibodies detected 20100125.0274
Enzootic bovine leukosis - UK: ex Canada via colostrum 20100123.0259
2009
----
Enzootic bovine leukosis - New Zealand (03): Europe 20091004.3449
Enzootic bovine leukosis - New Zealand (02): eradicated, not 20091001.3417
Enzootic bovine leukosis - New Zealand: eradicated 20090928.3388
2008
----
Enzootic bovine leukosis - Finland: OIE 20080404.1241
2005
----
Enzootic bovine leukosis - Switzerland: susp 20050625.1783
1997
----
Enzootic bovine leukosis - Egypt 19970614.1252
.................................................sb/tg/msp/lm
</body>
