<header id=036767>
Published Date: 2018-06-12 14:49:36 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ebola update (33): Congo DR, cases, response, WHO, diagnosis
Archive Number: 20180612.5850968
</header>
<body id=036767>
EBOLA UPDATE (33): DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, CASES, RESPONSE, WHO, DIAGNOSIS
********************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Case update
- Epidemiological situation 11 Jun 2018, DRC Ministry of Health
[2] Ebola vaccination raises hopes and doubts
[3] Status of outbreak
- Diagnostic tools for Ebola
- Role of health workers in containing Ebola
- WHO: Regional Strategic Plan for EVD Operational Readiness and Preparedness
[4] Research: How to slow down Ebola

******
[1] Case update
- 11 Jun 2018. Epidemiological situation 10 Jun 2018, DRC Ministry of Health [in French, machine trans., edited]
https://us13.campaign-archive.com/?u=89e5755d2cca4840b1af93176&id=0c6c51db5f

Two new suspected cases in Itipo, in the health zone of Iboko, which is now the center of attention because it is the only health area that continues to report confirmed cases of Ebola just over a month after launching the response.

The Minister of Health also [during a visit to Itipo, Iboko -- see below] thanked ALIMA [Alliance for International Medical Action] who realized the wish of the population by installing an Ebola treatment center in Itipo in about 10 days. Until now, patients were temporarily taken care of in a transit center in Itipo before being transferred to the Bikoro Reference General Hospital, thus finding themselves away from their families. From now on, all patients can be treated near their homes.

Epidemiological situation
The epidemiological situation of the Ebola virus disease dated 10 Jun 2018:
- a total of 55 cases of haemorrhagic fever were reported in the region, including 38 confirmed, 14 probable, and 3 suspected;
- 2 new suspected cases in Iboko;
- 13 samples were negative;
- no deaths reported today [to date total of 28 deaths; 14 of them among the confirmed cases];
- no new cases confirmed.

Epidemiological analyzes have identified contacts living in nearby health areas in Bikoro and Iboko. These contacts are followed and advised to limit their movements during the entire follow-up period of 21 days.

Remarks
- Negative tests are systematically removed from the summary table.
- The category of probable cases includes all reported deaths for which it was not possible to obtain biological samples for laboratory confirmation.

News from the Ebola response
- Vaccination
Since the launch of the vaccination on [21 May 2018], 2295 people have been vaccinated, including 713 in Mbandaka, 498 in Bikoro, 1054 in Iboko, and 30 in Ingende.

- Minister of Health and WHO Director General visit Itipo, Iboko
On [Mon 11 Jun 2018], the Minister of Health, Dr Oly Ilunga Kalenga, went to Itipo, in the health zone of Iboko, accompanied by the Director General of WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom.

Upon arrival, Dr Oly Ilunga Kalenga congratulated the Ministry of Health experts deployed to Itipo for the work accomplished. In about 10 days, they were able to put in place all the components of the response and effective coordination despite difficult logistical conditions. The Minister of Health was particularly impressed by the functioning of the local commissions and the mechanism for monitoring alerts and contacts through rapid response teams that go from village to village on a motorcycle. They also succeeded in establishing a genuine dialogue with the indigenous Pygmy communities, which enabled them to accept several public health measures, including safe burial.

The visit of the Minister of Health and the Director General of WHO ended with a meeting with the National Association of Ebola Winners (ANVE). The ANVE brings together people who have been cured of Ebola as well as the relatives of the victims. During the exchange session with their hosts, they shared poignant testimonies. Despite the fact that the victors lost all their material possessions, which were destroyed in order to avoid any contamination, they shared messages filled with hope for the future and were grateful for this 2nd chance they were given. The Minister of Health is committed to supporting them through the ANVE to help them start a new life.

Transmission chain at Itipo
---------------------------
The last confirmed case of Ebola to date in the Itipo health area, reported on [3 Jun 2018], was a 7-year-old girl whose mother was a probable case who died on [20 May 2018]. The entire chain of transmission around the family (contacts, contacts of contacts) has been identified. A dialogue was initiated with the family that was receptive and agreed to collaborate with the health authorities. Vaccination within this circle is underway.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The case numbers here are lower than the ones reported in the previous update Ebola update (32): Congo DR, cases, preparation, research 20180611.5849759]; variation can be due to subsequent exclusion of initially suspected cases by laboratory testing. The numbers of confirmed (38) and probable (14) cases have remained the same since 6 Jun 2018 - Mod.UBA]

******
[2] Ebola vaccination raises hopes and doubts
- 11 Jun 2018. Crucial test of Ebola vaccine raises hopes, doubts in Congo
[ABC News, Associated Press (AP) report] [edited]
https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/wireStory/crucial-test-ebola-vaccine-raises-hopes-doubts-congo-55801039
[Byline: Sam Mednick, Lauran Neergaard]

[M's] 6 children have all been vaccinated. But she refused, telling government social workers and WHO workers that she didn't believe her husband died from Ebola. She said the hospital never showed her records confirming he'd tested positive for the virus.

Last month, 11-year-old [GU] and her 6-year-old brother lost their father to Ebola. Both were vaccinated. But a shot alone doesn't end the worry. UN workers monitor the children several times a day for fevers, an early symptom, until the incubation period passes.

Success with the vaccination strategy hinges on the speed at which health workers can identify people at risk. "If you detect cases late, you're missing the opportunity to protect people," said Dr Iza Ciglenecki, who is working on the vaccination campaign with Doctors Without Borders [MSF].

[On Fri 8 Jun 2018], WHO emergency response chief Peter Salama said many people vaccinated in Mbandaka received the shots more than 10 days ago, meaning they're now protected -- the vaccine has had time to kick in.

Finding people who need vaccination is much harder in the remote area of Iboko, where a new case was just reported. Shoddy infrastructure adds to the challenge. "The roads are so bad that even if a person gets vaccinated it can be too late and they can still die," said Rosy Boyekwa Yamba, a regional representative for the Ministry of Health in Mbandaka.

It can take days to travel just 100 mi (160 km) to reach remote areas where Ebola still is spreading. The vaccine must be kept at a temperature of minus 76 to minus 112 deg F (minus 60 to minus 80 deg C), and can only be kept in mobile freezers for up to 7 days.

Yamba also worries that potentially infected people aren't being found. As many as 5 such people came forward last week [week of 4 Jun 2018] in Mbandaka after he pleaded with community members to "be honest with him" about whether they'd been in contact with someone who had the disease.

[M's] refusal to believe that Ebola killed her husband is a common reaction in the region. While many in Mbandaka have taken to washing hands and avoiding physical contact amid the outbreak, many also remain skeptical. They often don't trust a government they say is corrupt. Of the dozens of people The Associated Press spoke to on a recent visit, nearly all said they don't believe Ebola exists and referred to it as witchcraft.

This is Congo's 9th outbreak but illnesses are usually in remote areas, not cities. "Ebola is not here," said a local resident. "It's a disease created by organizations to get money."

Dr Pierre Rollin, an Ebola expert with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, understands. "People die every day and everywhere but nobody's interested. Suddenly because of Ebola people are interested and that makes you suspicious," he said. "Why would they trust us?"

[M] seems to have escaped infection. The incubation period for Ebola is up to 21 days and her husband died 3 weeks ago. "I'm still here," she said.

Still, WHO officials say 3/4 of those who have been approached have agreed to a shot since the campaign started 2 weeks ago. Once you've got people on board "you've tackled 90 percent of the problem," said Dr Alhassane Toure, the WHO coordinator for ring vaccination in Congo and Guinea.

Health experts say the next 2 weeks will be critical in determining whether the outbreak will be brought under control. The WHO is now shifting efforts to more remote areas to contain the outbreak. The organization has predicted there could be up to 300 cases of Ebola in the coming months. "We could see is another introduction of someone that comes from Itipo (a village in Iboko) or somewhere else to see family (in Mbandaka)," said CDC's Rollin. In the last few days there's been a big push in Itipo, the epicenter of the outbreak with 24 confirmed cases, to retrace people and vaccinate contacts as well as health workers, he said.

No matter how the outbreak unfolds Rollin says it will be nearly impossible to say whether the vaccine worked to stop the disease's spread. "We can say the vaccine plus all the other measures work, but you can't say the vaccine by itself works," he said. In order to do that a controlled test would have to be run where in one place only the vaccine is being used and in another it's not being used at all.

Next year [2019], Merck plans to seek approval of the vaccine from the US Food and Drug Administration [FDA], based on previous studies of the shots. While the vaccine isn't being formally studied in the current Congo outbreak, regulatory authorities would want to know if unforeseen side effects crop up.

"If it's fully approved then in each outbreak it'll be the 1st measure and could be used all over the region," Dr Jean-Jacques Muyembe, director general of the National Institute for Biomedical Research in Kinshasa told the AP.

In West Africa, a large study is underway that compares the Merck shot and a 2nd vaccine candidate made by Janssen Pharmaceuticals to determine best vaccination strategies and track how long protection lasts.

In the meantime, some recipients say the shot provided peace of mind. Seated in a yard in the center of town, a Mbandaka resident proudly slaps her vaccination papers on the table. She had cradled her grandson in her arms as he vomited blood on the hospital floor, and he later died. His case wasn't officially confirmed as Ebola, but she knew she needed to get vaccinated. Tapping her arm where she was given the needle, the 68-year-old beams. "Give me the vaccine," she says. "I get life with the vaccine."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The article above includes a map showing the location of Iboko, Mbandaka, and Bikoro. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

******
[3] Status of outbreak
- 11 Jun 2018. Diagnostic Tools for Ebola
[Nature journal, News, edited]
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05389-2

Health workers fighting the Ebola epidemic that swept West Africa several years ago waited days, even a week, for the results of laboratory tests to detect the deadly virus. But in an Ebola outbreak that began in early April [2018] in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), this waiting time has shrunk to hours -- thanks to a genetic test that was developed in response to the 2014-2016 West African epidemic.

Researchers and health officials credit the faster tests with helping to contain the spread of Ebola in the DRC, by allowing those infected to be isolated and their contacts traced promptly. And should sparks from this outbreak light new fires in neighbouring countries, the nimbler test could help to avert a repeat of the devastating West African epidemic.

The test involves a small machine called the GeneXpert, which is widely used across Africa to diagnose tuberculosis. The DRC's government has made the GeneXpert its primary method of testing for Ebola in the current outbreak.

"Labs have been set up with 2 to 3 days' notice in new transmission zones, whereas in West Africa it took months and months to get facilities up and running," says Mark Perkins, head of laboratory networks for the World Health Organization (WHO) Health Emergencies Programme. "It's a remarkable change."

One of the biggest lessons of the West African epidemic -- in which around 29 000 people were infected and 11 000 died in Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia -- was the need to diagnose cases of Ebola more quickly. Better lab tests could have averted 30-70 percent of cases and saved thousands of lives and billions of dollars, according to a May [2018] report by the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics in Geneva, Switzerland.

Rapid testing
-------------
Most Ebola lab diagnostics detect genetic sequences that are specific to the virus in blood, serum, and other bodily fluids. During the West African epidemic, these manual tests required highly trained scientists working in sophisticated, highly secure labs that were often far from outbreak zones.

In the DRC, by contrast, the same tests are being performed more rapidly, nearer to transmission zones and in an automated manner by GeneXpert. The machine uses custom cartridges for different diseases and was developed for resource-poor settings. In response to the 2014-16 epidemic, the firm developed a cartridge, Xpert Ebola, to test for the Zaire strain of Ebola, which is behind the current DRC outbreak. The turnaround time from taking a sample to receiving a diagnosis in the outbreak is usually a matter of hours or at most a day, Perkins says.

The DRC outbreak, which is mainly centered in remote regions of Equateur province in the north west of the country, is still relatively small, with 38 lab-confirmed cases, 14 probable cases, and 14 suspected. As of [9 Jun 2018], 28 of those people had died (See 'Rapid Response' --available at the source URL above).

Health officials are cautiously optimistic that the outbreak can be quickly stopped. But the WHO is still worried that the virus could spread across the DRC and Central Africa. Some cases may have gone undetected, which could lead to resurgences of the disease. And for the 1st time in the DRC, cases have occurred in an urban area: Mbandaka, a city of more than a million people and a major travel hub.

Should further regional outbreaks occur, GeneXpert machines will continue to be a big help, officials say. There are already around 150 of the machines in DRC and several hundred in nearby countries for testing for tuberculosis and other diseases. By swapping in Xpert Ebola cartridges, a large Ebola testing network could be quickly created, says Perkins.

That's provided that there are enough Ebola test cartridges. No countries have purchased stockpiles of Xpert Ebola cartridges, and the DRC had none when the outbreak started, says Iain Sharp-Paul, a marketing director at Cepheid, the Sunnyvale, California company that makes the machines. It shipped 3600 Xpert Ebola cartridges to the DRC in less than 2 days after being alerted to the outbreak, and a further 4000 cartridges are on their way.

Faster field tests
------------------
Other Ebola diagnostics are also being field-tested in the DRC outbreak. Public health officials are keen to have access to screening tests, which, unlike GeneXpert, do not require electricity or refrigeration, and can be distributed to affected areas in large numbers to get on-the-spot results within minutes. These tests work by detecting Ebola proteins using the same analytical technique as over-the-counter pregnancy tests.

Researchers plan to evaluate 2 such tests in the DRC outbreak. One is the OraQuick Ebola rapid antigen test made by medical device company OraSure Technologies in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. OraQuick has been approved by the WHO for emergency use in testing patients' blood samples -- as well as the oral fluids of corpses -- for the Zaire strain of the virus. Also being tried out is a more-experimental test, QuickNavi-Ebola, produced by diagnostic company Denka Seiken in Tokyo. [OraSure] has sent 2000 tests to DRC, and Denka Seiken 1500.

Outbreak responders aim to use the tests to investigate suspect deaths reported in remote and difficult-to-access regions, says Perkins. This will help confirm tests carried out by GeneXpert and provide a better idea of the tests' performance. Lack of field data has been a barrier to the adoption of such tests.

Thanks to lessons learned from the West African outbreak, "a new paradigm for Ebola virus detection and diagnosis is taking shape", says Mara Jana Broadhurst, an Ebola diagnostics expert at Stanford University in California. "It is critical that this process is guided by careful field studies."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

- 11 Jun 2018. Role of health workers in containing Ebola
[VOA (Voice of America) Learning English, summ., edited]
https://learningenglish.voanews.com/a/healthcare-workers-contain-ebola-outbreak/4427003.html
[Byline: Anna Matteo]

Ebola is back in Africa -- this time in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Doctor Tarit Mukhopadhyay is a vaccine expert with the University College, London. He leads the Vaccine Development Working Group for the UK Vaccine Network. He explains how the vaccine works. "What it does, it teaches the immune system to recognize those Ebola proteins on the surface of this modified virus, and in doing so, create a protective response against that."

Scientists can only test the vaccine when there is an Ebola outbreak. Dr Mukhopadhyay says he and other researchers have many questions.

"What we're trying to do now is to establish how effective is this vaccine? Do you need one dose, or 2 doses to be protected? And once you've been injected or vaccinated with this, how long does that protection last for, as well?"

Containing Ebola virus disease may be a problem in the DRC. ...

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

- 11 Jun 2018. WHO: Regional Strategic Plan for EVD Operational Readiness and Preparedness
[WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs), summ., edited]
http://www.who.int/csr/don/11-june-2018-ebola/en/

WHO, in collaboration with the countries, has developed a 9-month WHO Regional Strategic Plan for EVD Operational Readiness and Preparedness in Countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo (June 2018-February 2019). The strategic plan aims to ensure alignment of preparedness and readiness actions in the 9 countries focusing on 8 technical areas: strengthening multisectoral coordination; surveillance for early detection; laboratory diagnostic capacity; points of entry; rapid response teams; risk communication, social mobilization, and community engagement; case management and infection prevention and control (IPC) capacities; and, operations support and logistics. The purpose of the WHO Regional Strategic Plan is to ensure that the countries bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo are prepared and ready to implement timely and effective risk mitigation, detection and response measures should there be any importation of EVD cases.

As of [7 Jun 2018], 8 countries (Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda) have completed contingency plans; of these, one plan has been fully funded by one partner. Under the leadership of the ministries of health, preparedness activities are already being implemented in the 9 countries with technical and financial support provided by national budgets, WHO and partners.

WHO advice
----------
The WHO Director-General convened an Emergency Committee meeting under the International Health Regulations (IHR) (2005) for the EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 18 May 2018; it was the view of the committee that the conditions for a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) are not currently met. The committee advised against the application of any travel or trade restrictions to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The committee also concluded that neighbouring countries should urgently strengthen preparedness and surveillance in order to mitigate the risk of international spread.

Priority actions in neighbouring countries to scale up preparedness
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Ministries of Health, WHO and partners are already engaged in the implementation of EVD preparedness activities in the targeted countries. The findings of the WHO PST [preparation support teams] missions helped to identify key challenges and priorities and informed the development of the national EVD contingency plans.

WHO will continue to work closely with the Ministries of Health, other sectors and partners to fill gaps and to implement the contingency plans. The key areas of focus are as follows:

Coordination:
- develop an EVD contingency plan with a monitoring framework, providing training where necessary for its implementation;
- establish an emergency coordination mechanism at the national level and in border areas;
- establish national emergency operation centres (EOCs) for coordinating an emergency response, and test key capabilities to implement the EVD contingency plan through simulation exercises.

Surveillance:
- accelerate surveillance and early warning activities in high-risk regions by strengthening integrated disease surveillance and response (IDSR)-based surveillance systems;
- provide targeted training for EVD detection for health workers and community health workers in high-risk regions.

Rapid response teams (RRT):
- establish at least one fully equipped RRT trained specifically for EVD response and preposition it in the capital or near a high-risk region.

Points of entry (PoE):
- map and capacitate relevant high-risk PoE with trained health workers who are safely screening incoming travellers, collecting relevant information to enable contact tracing and providing appropriate messages on how to minimize risk of infection and where to seek medical assistance should they develop symptoms consistent with EVD;
- identify health promotion needs at PoE without official checking points.

Laboratory:
- Strengthen national laboratory capabilities for EVD laboratory testing. Each facility should be equipped with trained laboratory staff and supplies.

Case management:
- establish triage and isolation capacity in regional hospital(s) in high-risk areas. Triage units and isolation facilities will be equipped with essential equipment and staff will be trained;
- identify appropriate transportation capacity for suspect/confirmed EVD cases and ensure the safety of all involved in the referral pathways.

Risk communication:
- activate risk communication, social mobilization and community engagement coordination mechanisms at the national level;
- develop a national plan for risk communication, social mobilization, and community engagement; map key partners, stakeholders and capacities.

Logistics:
- develop and adopt an operation support logistics (OSL) plan with Ministry of Health, relevant partners and sectors;
- maintain a sufficient stock of essential medicines and medical supplies, including personal protective equipment (PPE) and body bags.

Partner coordination for readiness and preparedness of neighbouring countries
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
- WHO has a network of health partners that are supporting countries in implementing preparedness and readiness activities. WHO is working closely with CDC, IOM, UNICEF, and MSF to scale up operational readiness and preparedness in neighbouring countries;
- WHO also facilitated the deployment of GOARN [Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network] experts in laboratory, surveillance, IPC, and risk communication;
- WHO also deployed emergency medical teams to support training and case management readiness in priority 1 countries.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall

[Preparedness in the areas mentioned above is key to disease control and compliance with the International Health Regulations(IHR) - Mod.UBA]

******
[4] [n.d., accessed] 11 Jun 2018. Research: How to slow down Ebola
[ScienMag, edited]
https://scienmag.com/how-to-slow-down-ebola/

Between 2013 and 2016, West Africa suffered the most severe outbreak of Ebola ever recorded. In Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, a total of 29 000 patients were diagnosed with the disease. More than 11 000 people didn't survive.

The epidemic has now passed, but researchers are wondering which intervention strategies would have been most effective in containing the disease.

Creating an Ebola family tree
-----------------------------
With the genetic data of 1610 samples from Ebola patients, researchers from the Rega Institute at KU Leuven [Belgium] mapped the spread of the Ebola virus in West-Africa between 2013 and 2016.

"We created a genetic family tree of the epidemic, in time as well as space, with the oldest DNA sample from early 2014 in Guinea, a sample of the virus when it entered Sierra Leone in March or April 2014, and so on," says Professor Guy Baele from KU Leuven.

Key role of the capitals
------------------------
The researchers connected the family tree of the epidemic to other information, such as geographical information and transportation.

"Long-distance transportation, such as air travel by contaminated people, doesn't appear to have been important in spreading the virus," says postdoctoral researcher Simon Dellicour from KU Leuven. "Contrary to what happens during a flu epidemic, the Ebola epidemic spread due to short-distance travelling. The epidemic stepped up its pace once the virus had reached Conakry, Freetown, and Monrovia -- the capitals of Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, respectively. These capitals attracted the virus, so to speak, and played a key role in spreading it."

Closing international borders
-----------------------------
The findings also reveal which policy measures can successfully slow down or, conversely, accelerate the spread of the Ebola virus.

"Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia have each closed their international borders at a different moment in time. These interventions are visible in our phylogenetic tree of the Ebola virus and we also see how the virus continued to evolve afterwards. Closing the borders was an effective way to prevent Ebola from becoming an international epidemic. That's important to know, as this type of intervention strategy obviously has major economic and social consequences. Preventive measures within one city or district would have made little difference: we believe that a coordinated approach would have had a bigger impact."

Potential for on-going epidemics
--------------------------------
"This research method gives us a quick and accurate view of the key times and locations of the Ebola epidemic," Baele continues. "That teaches us where and when we should have intervened."

"This information is also useful for ongoing epidemics. For one thing, we want to apply this phylogenetic inference-based technique to rabies, a disease that still kills 60 000 people each year in Asia and Africa."

This research was funded by Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO), the European Research Council (Consolidator Grant no. 725422-ReservoirDOCS), and the Wellcome Trust (Grant 206298/Z/17/Z).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[Treatment is of course a key challenge with Ebola cases. The report above proposes an innovative approach to tackling that. - Mod.UBA

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of DR Congo: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5850968,194]
See Also
Ebola update (32): Congo DR, cases, preparation, research 20180611.5849759
Ebola update (31): Congo DR, cases, response, WHO 20180610.5848785
Ebola update (30): Congo DR, cases, WHO, action 20180609.5847441
Ebola update (29): Congo DR, cases, MSF, antivirals 20180608.5845483
Ebola update (28): Congo DR, cases, WHO, response, treatment, funding 20180607.5843872
Ebola update (27): Congo DR, cases, travel screening, children 20180606.5841051
Ebola update (26): Congo DR, border controls, bat reservoir 20180604.5838529
Ebola update (25): Congo DR, case update, intl. travel screening 20180603.5836552
Ebola update (24): Congo DR, case update, African aid response 20180602.5835414
Ebola update (23): Congo DR, cases, vacc. campaign targets, vaccine development 20180601.5834040
Ebola update (22): Congo DR, cases, cures, domestic and international travel 20180531.5831747
Ebola update (21): Congo DR, update, WHO, vaccination, therapeutics 20180530.5829192
Ebola update (20): Congo DR, case update, lessons, logistics, financing, flights 20180529.5824985
Ebola update (19): Congo DR, case update 20180528.5822466
Ebola update (18): cases, Uganda NOT, Congo DR vaccination campaign 20180527.5821927
Ebola update (17): case update, public fears, government responses 20180526.5820606
Ebola update (16): cases, Congo DR cultural factors, vaccine impl., case terminology 20180525.5817907
Ebola update (15): case update, quarantine breaches, border controls, vaccine 20180524.5816349
Ebola update (14): case update, response, prediction, maps 20180523.5812835
Ebola update (13): case update, prevention 20180521.5809540
Ebola update (12): update, USA, response 20180520.5806396
Ebola update (11): WHO, vaccination, response 20180519.5805133
Ebola update (10): urban case Congo DR, response, support 20180517.5801917
Ebola update (09): update, alerts, prevention 20180516.5799567
Ebola update (08): summary, emergency plan, vaccine, roads 20180515.5797415
Ebola update (07): Congo DR, nurse, Uganda susp, WHO, border, vaccine 20180513.5795881
Ebola update (06): Congo DR, susp, RFI, vulnerability, response, control 20180512.5794300
Ebola update (05): Congo DR, outbreak update, vaccine, preparedness, research 20180511.5792856
Ebola update (04): Nigeria, Kenya, Congo DR (ET), WHO 20180510.5791247
Ebola update (03): Congo DR (ET), WHO 20180509.5790577
Ebola update (02): Congo DR (ET) 20180508.5789723
.................................................uba/mj/ao/jh
</body>
