<header id=023302>
Published Date: 2013-08-20 12:30:01 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> West Nile virus - USA (07): (CO) equine
Archive Number: 20130820.1890760
</header>
<body id=023302>
WEST NILE VIRUS - USA (02): (CO) EQUINE
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 20 Aug 2013
Source: Horsetalk [edited]
http://horsetalk.co.nz/2013/08/20/colorado-west-nile-virus-horse-2013/#axzz2cWbkGClA


This year's [2013] 1st reported equine case of West Nile Virus (WNV) was diagnosed in Colorado last week [week of 12 Aug 2013].

Colorado State University's Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory diagnosed the WNV positive horse, a 3-month-old colt from Montezuma County.

According to Hana Van Campen, professor of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology at CSU, the clinical signs of WNV encephalitis are very similar to many other infectious diseases that affect the nervous system of horses such as rabies and western equine encephalitis, as well as causes such as trauma and poisonings.

If a horse becomes sick, owners should have their veterinarian examine the horse and select appropriate diagnostic tests and procedures to determine the cause of the illness.

"The majority of horses, like people, that become infected with West Nile virus do not show any signs of illness," said Van Campen, who also works at the Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory.

"In a small percentage of infected horses, the virus reaches the brain and spinal cord. These horses may have a fever, be lethargic, stop eating, and have muscle fasciculation (twitching), tremors, incoordination, and weakness progressing to recumbency."

Van Campen says there are 3 types of vaccines readily available to protect horses against severe disease caused by WNV. "It is most important to vaccinate young horses against WNV thoroughly following the directions of the vaccine manufacturers," Van Campen said.

This summer's [2013] high temperatures, along with frequent and heavy precipitation, have created ideal conditions for the area's mosquitoes that carry the West Nile virus, according to Chet Moore, an infectious disease researcher at the university.

Last year's [2012] numbers of mosquitoes were low because of the severe drought, as well as generally cool temperatures. Lack of spring and summer rain meant fewer water-filled locations for the mosquitoes to lay their eggs.

Cool temperatures slow the development of larvae and cause female mosquitoes to diminish their efforts to bite humans and animals.

Moore's lab at the university's Foothills Campus works with the cities of Fort Collins and Loveland to test samples of mosquito populations for the virus.

"A spring with lots of snow and rainfall followed by warm weather tends to be a sign that these mosquitoes will be in higher numbers because the weather pattern provides them with more habitat," Moore said.

"Warm weather leads to runoff and flooding, which leaves standing water for mosquitoes to lay their eggs. Summer monsoon rains further contribute to the problem." Hot and dry weather also means an increase in irrigation, leading to standing water on irrigated land.

A mosquito lays her eggs in standing water and if the water sits for about 5 to 6 days, the larvae develop into adult mosquitoes. Some large areas of standing water can produce as many as 1 million new mosquitoes; even a birdbath, without preventative measures, can spawn hundreds of newly hatched mosquitoes every 4 to 6 days.

Not all mosquitoes carry the virus; in the United States, there are several species of mosquito that are considered by scientists as important in transmitting West Nile virus, and in the West, it is the _Culex tarsalis_ and _Culex pipiens_ mosquitoes that carry and transmit the virus.

While temperatures play a large role in determining how much of a problem virus-carrying pests may be, scientists still are working to unravel some of the mysteries of West Nile virus.

Bird populations, for example, also may impact the number of mosquitoes carrying the virus. Birds carry the virus after being bitten by an infected mosquito, then pass it on to uninfected mosquitoes when they are bitten, helping spread the disease through the mosquito population that in turn infect humans and other animals. Some species of birds, including crows, magpies, jays, and many hawks and owls, are extremely susceptible to West Nile infection and suffer high mortality.

The virus has only existed in Colorado since 2002, but researchers don't know if the virus survives in infected mosquitoes over the winter to re-emerge each spring, or if migrating birds return the virus to the area as they return each spring.

The average lifespan of a mosquito is about a week, and although adult female mosquitoes can overwinter, the virus does not seem to survive the winter in mosquitoes.

Only the female mosquitoes bite and transmit the virus. Male mosquitoes feed on plant nectars. Females must take a blood meal to produce eggs and need to mate with a male only once in their lifetime. Once mated and fed, they produce as many as 200 eggs every 3 to 4 days in ideal conditions.

In their lifetime, some mosquitoes can easily travel up to 30 miles [48 km], sometimes covering up to as much as 15 miles [24 km] in a night. Fortunately, the _Culex_ vectors of West Nile virus fly only about half those distances.

When cooler temperatures strike -- in the low 50s [deg F/10 deg C], which occurs often at night in the spring and fall -- mosquitoes are unable to fly, which contributes to diminishing mosquito bites in the fall and increasing bites when temperatures warm.

"Early prevention is the key to lowering mosquito populations," Moore said. "Taking steps in the spring can reduce the numbers of mosquitoes through the summer."

Moore's top tips for avoiding a bite from a mosquito:

- Water management: fill low areas where water puddles with dirt and treat standing water in ponds, birdbaths, and other areas with larvicide according to directions on the label. Clean birdbaths and other yard decorations that incorporate water about once a week and also treat those with larvicide donuts if needed. Several larvicide products are safe for birds and other animals -- be sure to check the label before using any product.

- Avoid the outdoors from dusk to midnight, which is a prime time for the mosquitoes carrying West Nile virus to feed. The species of mosquitoes carrying the virus are active later into the night than some other species in the area, which feed mainly in the early evening hours.

- Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants in light colors. Lighter-colored clothing repels mosquitoes more than dark-colored clothing.

- Use a repellent when necessary. Repellents with DEET are most often recommended; a relatively new product called picaridin is almost as effective. Picaridin is Centers for Disease Control and EPA approved and it is not as oily as DEET because it is made with an alcohol base. The strong odor of lemon eucalyptus may also be effective compared to other "natural" repellents. Follow the label when applying repellents because over-applying it may irritate the skin. Citronella has not been proven to be very effective against mosquitoes.

There is no scientific relationship between wearing perfume, aftershave, or other scented products and mosquito bites, although some scents may attract mosquitoes and some may repel them. Some people are more attractive to mosquitoes based on their body temperature, moisture on the skin, and specific compounds in their sweat. There also is no scientific evidence that consuming garlic, vitamin B, or other foods work in keeping mosquitoes away.

Specific recommendations for vaccination can be found at http://www.aaep.org/wnv.htm

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The issue appears to be, when is a horse too young to vaccinate. There are a variety of vaccination platforms and therefore a variety of recommendations on when to vaccine.

Vaccines
--------
There are 4 USDA licensed vaccines currently available (2 are inactivated whole WN virus vaccines; one is a non-replicating live canary pox recombinant vector vaccine; and one is an inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine):
Inactivated whole virus vaccines with an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of 2 intramuscular injections administered 3 to 6 weeks apart followed by a 12-month revaccination interval. These products are labeled as an aid in prevention of viremia or as an aid in prevention of viremia and mortality and an aid in reduction of severity of clinical disease.

Recombinant canary pox vaccine with protective antigens expressed in a vaccine strain canary pox vector which does not replicate in the horse. The vaccine contains an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of two intramuscular injections administered 4 to 6 weeks apart followed by a 12 month revaccination interval. The product is labeled as an aid in prevention of disease, viremia, and encephalitis.

Inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine with protective antigens expressed in a vaccine strain yellow fever virus vector and contains an adjuvant. Label instructions call for a primary vaccination series of two intramuscular injections administered 3 to 4 weeks apart followed by a 12 month revaccination interval. This product is labeled as an aid in reduction of disease, encephalitis and viremia.

All of the current WN vaccine products carry one year duration of immunity, with challenge, consistent with their respective label claims.

Vaccination schedules
---------------------
- Adult horses previously vaccinated: vaccinate annually in the spring, prior to the onset of the insect vector season.

For animals at high risk or with limited immunity, more frequent vaccination or appropriately timed revaccination is recommended in order to induce protective immunity during periods of likely exposure. For instance, juvenile horses (less than 5 years of age) appear to be more susceptible than adult horses that have likely been vaccinated and/or had subclinical exposure. Geriatric horses (more than 15 years of age) have been demonstrated to have enhanced susceptibility to WNV disease. Therefore, more frequent vaccination may be recommended to meet the vaccination needs of these horses.

Booster vaccinations are warranted according to local disease or exposure risk. However, more frequent vaccination may be indicated with any of these products depending on risk assessment.

- Adult horses previously unvaccinated or having unknown vaccinal history:
Inactivated whole virus vaccine: a primary series of 2 doses is administered to naive horses. A 4 to 6 week interval between doses is recommended. The label recommended revaccination interval is 12 months.

Recombinant canary pox vector vaccine: a primary series of 2 doses is administered to naive horses with a 4 to 6 week interval between doses. The label recommended revaccination interval is 12 months.

Inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine: a primary series of 2 doses is administered to naive horses. A 3 to 4 week interval between doses is recommended. The label recommended revaccination interval is 12 months.

- Pregnant mares: limited studies have been performed that examine vaccinal protection against WNV disease in pregnant mares. While none of the licensed vaccines are specifically labeled for administration to pregnant mares at this time, practitioners have vaccinated pregnant mares due to the risk of natural infection. It is an accepted practice by many veterinarians to administer WNV vaccines to pregnant mares as the risk of adverse consequences of WNV infection outweighs any reported adverse effects of use of vaccine.

- Pregnant mares previously vaccinated: vaccinate at 4 to 6 weeks before foaling.

- Pregnant mares previously unvaccinated: initiate a primary vaccination series (see adult horses previously unvaccinated) immediately. Limited antibody response was demonstrated in pregnant mares vaccinated for the 1st time with the originally licensed inactivated, whole virus vaccine. It is unknown if this is true for the other products. Vaccination of naïve mares while open is a preferred strategy.

- Foals: limited studies have been performed examining maternal antibody inference and inhibition of protection against WNV disease. The only data currently available is for the originally licensed, inactivated whole virus product in which foals were demonstrated to produce antibody in response to vaccination despite the presence of maternal antibody. No studies have been performed evaluating protection from disease in foals vaccinated in the face of maternal immunity.

- Foals of vaccinated mares:
Inactivated whole virus vaccines: administer a primary 3-dose series beginning at 4-6 months of age. A 4 to 6 week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses is recommended. The 3rd dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age prior to the onset of the next mosquito season. Data indicate that maternal antibodies do not interfere with the originally licensed, inactivated whole virus vaccine; however protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with these products if risk assessment warrants.

Recombinant canary pox vector vaccine: administration of a 3-dose primary vaccination series beginning at 4 to 6 months of age. There should be a 4 week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses. The 3rd dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age prior to the onset of the next mosquito season. There are no data for the recombinant canary pox vector vaccine regarding maternal antibody interference. Protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with this product if risk assessment warrants.

Inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine: administration of a 3-dose primary vaccination series beginning at 4-6 months of age. There should be a 4 week interval between the 1st and 2nd doses. The 3rd dose should be administered at 10 to 12 months of age prior to the onset of the next mosquito season. There are no data for the inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine regarding maternal antibody interference. Protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with this product if risk assessment warrants.

- Foals of unvaccinated mares: the primary series of vaccinations should be initiated at 3 to 4 months of age and, where possible, be completed prior to the onset of the high-risk insect vector season.

Inactivated whole virus vaccines: administer a primary series of 3 doses with a 30-day interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 60-day interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. If the primary series is initiated during the mosquito vector season, an interval of 3 to 4 weeks between the 2nd and 3rd doses is preferable to the above described interval of 8 weeks. Data indicate that maternal antibodies do not interfere with the originally licensed product; however protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with these products if risk assessment warrants.

Recombinant canary pox vaccine: administer a primary series of 3-doses with a 30-day interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 60-day interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. If the primary series is initiated during the mosquito vector season, an interval of 3 to 4 weeks between the 2nd and 3rd doses is preferable to the above described interval of 8 weeks. There are no data for this product regarding maternal antibody interference. Protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with this product if risk assessment warrants.

Inactivated flavivirus chimera vaccine: administer a primary series of 3 doses with a 30-day interval between the 1st and 2nd doses and a 60-day interval between the 2nd and 3rd doses. If the primary series is initiated during the mosquito vector season, an interval of 3 to 4 weeks between the 2nd and 3rd doses is preferable to the above described interval of 8 weeks. There are no data for this product regarding maternal antibody interference. Protection from clinical disease has not been provocatively tested in foals less than 6 months of age. Animals may be vaccinated more frequently with this product if risk assessment warrants.

- Horses having been naturally infected and recovered: recovered horses likely develop life-long immunity, but this has not been confirmed. Consider revaccination if the immune status of the animal changes the risk for susceptibility to infection or at the recommendation of the attending veterinarian. Examples of these conditions would include the long term use of corticosteroids and pituitary adenoma.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.aaep.org/wnv.htm

Colorado may be found on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/81OQ. - Mod.TG]
See Also
West Nile virus - USA (04): (TX) equine 20130622.1786262
2012
----
West Nile virus - USA (03): 2012 (IL) comment 20130516.1717709
West Nile virus - USA (02): 2012 20130515.1715749
West Nile virus - USA: (MS) 20130409.1633975
2012
----
West Nile virus - USA (21) 20121122.1420567
West Nile virus - USA (20): (ME, MS) 20121107.1395949
West Nile virus - USA (19): (OK) equine 20121103.1388507
West Nile Virus - USA (18): equine 20121014.1341793
West Nile virus - USA (17) 20120930.1316227
Eastern equine encephalitis, West Nile virus - USA: equine 20120920.1301319
.................................................sb/tg/mj/lm
</body>
