<header id=052308>
Published Date: 2020-01-01 14:42:25 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Feline panleukopenia - USA: (HI)
Archive Number: 20200101.6866464
</header>
<body id=052308>
FELINE PANLEUKOPENIA - USA: (HAWAII)
************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 30 Dec 2019
Source: KITV [edited]
https://www.kitv.com/story/41506756/oahu-veterinarians-concerned-about-a-spreading-virus-affecting-cats


Veterinarians on O'ahu are raising concerns about a deadly virus affecting cats. It's called the panleukopenia virus, and so far, there have been at least 10 reported cases in just a week at animal clinics.

It attacks cats' bone marrow and intestinal tract, and veterinarians say it only comes with about a 20 percent survival rate. It's spreads through contact with body fluids and fecal material.

Dr. Kelly Dowdall-Garberson with Aloha Affordable Veterinary Services says this is not the 1st time they've seen it. Some of the signs to look out for include vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss. The good news is the virus is preventable.

The vaccination requires several shots spread out over a few weeks costing about USD 20-30 each.

[Byline: Eddie Dowd]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[In the past, feline panleukopenia (FP) was a leading cause of death in cats. Today, it is an uncommon disease, due in large part to the availability and use of very effective vaccines. The disease is also called feline distemper or feline parvo.

Feline panleukopenia (FP) is a highly contagious viral disease of cats caused by the feline parvovirus. Kittens are most severely affected by the virus. The names feline distemper and feline parvo should not be confused with canine distemper or canine parvo; although their names are similar, they are caused by different viruses. The viruses do not infect people.

The feline parvovirus infects and kills cells rapidly growing and dividing, such as those in the bone marrow, intestines, and the developing fetus.

Because the FP virus is everywhere in the environment, virtually all kittens and cats are exposed to the virus at some point in their lives. While cats of any age may be infected with the feline parvovirus that causes FP, young kittens, sick cats, and unvaccinated cats are most susceptible. It is most commonly seen in cats 3-5 months of age; death from FP is more common at this age.

The virus has appeared in all parts of the United States and most countries of the world. Kennels, pet shops, animal shelters, unvaccinated feral cat colonies, and other areas where groups of cats are housed together appear to be the main reservoirs of FP. During the warm months, urban areas are likely to see outbreaks of FP because cats are more likely to come in contact with other cats.

Cats can shed the virus in their urine, stool, and nasal secretions; infection occurs when susceptible cats come in contact with these secretions, or even the fleas from infected cats. An infected cat tends to shed the virus for a relatively short period of time (1-2 days), but the virus can survive for up to a year in the environment, so cats may become infected without ever coming into direct contact with an infected cat. Bedding, cages, food dishes, and the hands or clothing of people who handle the infected cat may harbor the virus and transmit it to other cats. It is, therefore, very important to isolate infected cats. Any materials used on or for infected cats should not be used or allowed to come in contact with other cats, and people handling infected cats should practice proper hygiene to prevent spreading the infection.

The virus causing FP is difficult to destroy and resistant to many disinfectants. Ideally, unvaccinated cats should not be allowed into an area where an infected cat has been, even if the area has been disinfected.

The signs of FP can vary and may be similar to other illnesses such as salmonella or campylobacter infection, pancreatitis, feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection, or feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection. Infected cats may even show signs resembling those seen when a cat has been poisoned or has swallowed a foreign object.

The FP virus causes damage to the cells lining the intestines. It also attacks the bone marrow and lymph nodes, resulting in shortages of all types of white blood cells (panleukopenia) and of red blood cells (anemia). The 1st visible signs an owner might notice include generalized depression, loss of appetite, high fever, lethargy, vomiting, severe diarrhea, nasal discharge, and dehydration. Sick cats may sit for long periods of time in front of their water bowls but not drink much water. In some cats, the fever will come and go during the illness and abruptly fall to lower-than-normal levels shortly before death. In young kittens, the virus can also damage the brain and the eyes.

Pregnant female cats infected with the virus and become ill (even if they do not appear seriously ill) may abort or give birth to kittens with severe damage to the cerebellum, a part of the brain coordinating nerves, muscles and bones to produce body movements. These kittens are born with a syndrome called feline cerebellar ataxia, and their movement is accompanied by severe tremors (shaking).

Feline panleukopenia may be suspected based on a history of exposure to an infected cat, lack of vaccination, and the visible signs of illness. When that history of exposure is combined with blood tests showing severely reduced levels of all white blood cell types, FP is likely the cause of the cat's illness. FP is confirmed when the feline parvovirus is found in the cat's stool, but the results might be falsely positive if the cat was vaccinated for FP within 5-12 days prior to the test.

The likelihood of recovery from FP for infected kittens less than 8 weeks old is poor. Older cats have a greater chance of survival if adequate treatment is provided early. Since there are no medications capable of killing the virus, intensive care and treatment are critical to support the cat's health with medications and fluids until its own body and immune system can fight off the virus. Without such supportive care, up to 90 percent of cats with FP may die.

Treatment focuses on correcting dehydration, providing nutrients, and preventing secondary infection. Although antibiotics do not kill the virus, they are often necessary because infected cats are at a higher risk of bacterial infections because their immune systems are not fully functioning (due to the decreased white blood cells) and because bacteria from the damaged gut may enter the cat's bloodstream and cause infection.

If the cat survives for 5 days, its chances for recovery are greatly improved. Strict isolation from other cats is necessary to prevent spread of the virus. Other cats having been in contact with the infected cat, or in contact with objects or people who were in close contact with the sick cat, should be carefully monitored for any visible signs of illness. In most cases, once a cat recovers from FP, it will not infect other cats through direct contact, but some recovered cats can shed the virus in their stool and urine for up to 6 weeks.

Cats surviving an infection develop immunity which likely protects them for the rest of their lives. Mild cases going unnoticed will also produce immunity from future infection.

It is also possible for kittens to receive temporary immunity through the transfer of antibodies in the colostrum, the 1st milk produced by the mother. This is called "passive immunity," and how long it protects the kittens from infection depends upon the levels of protective antibodies produced by the mother. It rarely lasts longer than 12 weeks.

Prevention is vital to your cat's health. Today, there are vaccines offering the best protection from feline parvovirus infection. Vaccination is equally important for strictly indoor cats as well as indoor/outdoor cats because the virus is everywhere in the environment. Most young kittens receive their 1st vaccination between 6 and 8 weeks of age and follow-up vaccines are given until the kitten is around 16 weeks of age. Adult vaccination schedules vary with the age and health of the cat, as well as the risk of FP in the area. Consult your veterinarian for advice on an appropriate vaccination schedule for your cat(s); https://www.avma.org/resources-tools/pet-owners/petcare/feline-panleukopenia. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map available at:
Hawaii, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6866464,214]
See Also
2019
----
Feline panleukopenia - USA (03): (PA) alert 20191031.6754907
2018
----
Feline panleukopenia - USA (02): (TN) 20180927.6054740
Feline panleukopenia - USA: need for vaccination 20180715.5907149
2017
---
Panleukopenia virus, feline - USA (02): (NC) animal shelter, alert 20170908.5302524
Panleukopenia virus, feline - USA: (GA) cat shelter 20170628.5137290
2016
---
Panleukopenia virus, feline - USA: (MA) 20161021.4574695
2015
---
Panleukopenia virus, feline - Australia: (VI) 20150430.3332544
2004
---
Panleukopenia virus, feline - USA (MI) 20040810.2203
.................................................tg/msp/dk
</body>
