<header id=014000>
Published Date: 2018-03-09 05:49:20 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Jamestown Canyon virus - Canada: (MB)
Archive Number: 20180309.5675310
</header>
<body id=014000>
JAMESTOWN CANYON VIRUS - CANADA: (MANITOBA)
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 5 Mar 2018
Source: Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ) [edited]
http://www.cmaj.ca/content/190/9/E262 [subscription required]


ref: Vosoughi R, Walkty A, Drebot MA, Kadkhoda K. Jamestown Canyon virus meningoencephalitis mimicking migraine with aura in a resident of Manitoba. CMAJ. 2018; 190(9): E262-4. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.170940.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
A 26-year-old man with no substantial medical history presented to an academic emergency department in Winnipeg [Manitoba] with a headache and associated neurologic symptoms. The patient reported that earlier in the day while driving a car, he had felt a sudden tingling and numbness in his right foot. This subsequently spread up the right side of his body to his right leg, right arm, and the right side of his face. The episode lasted about 10 minutes before the symptoms spontaneously resolved. Later the same day, a 2nd episode of right-sided numbness occurred. This time, the symptoms were associated with difficulty speaking, prompting the patient to go to the emergency department.

Between 45 and 60 minutes after the onset of symptoms, the patient had a moderate-to-severe throbbing headache. The speech and sensory problems resolved within 2 hours and 30 minutes, whereas the headache improved within 11 hours. The patient reported no history of migraine headaches. During the visit to the emergency department, computed tomography (CT) imaging of the brain, CT angiogram of the cervical and cranial arteries, and unenhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain done with diffusion weighted imaging and apparent diffusion coefficient mapping were all unremarkable. The patient returned home the same day with a diagnosis of migraine with aura.

The patient woke up early in the morning 2 days later with numbness and tingling in his left foot, which gradually spread over several minutes to his left arm and the left side of his face, and was associated with a headache and a milder degree of speech impairment in the form of word-finding difficulty. No visual symptoms were reported. The patient again presented to the emergency department for further evaluation. Within one hour his neurologic deficits had improved, but he continued to complain of a severe bifrontal throbbing headache, with associated nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and phonophobia. The headache was worse with standing and activity. The patient reported no fever, chills, sweats, neck stiffness, or rash. A review of systems was otherwise negative.

The patient lived in Winnipeg and reported no recent travel outside of Manitoba. He had no contact with animals or people who were ill. There was no history of tick exposure. However, the patient did report numerous recent mosquito bites.

[Results of physical examination and laboratory tests are presented]

Serology was negative for human immunodeficiency virus-1 and -2, _Mycoplasma pneumoniae_ immunoglobulin M (IgM), mumps virus IgM, syphilis, Lyme disease, Epstein-Barr virus IgM (virus capsid antigen), West Nile virus IgM, and Powassan virus antibody (hemagglutination inhibition testing). Molecular testing by polymerase chain reaction on CSF was negative for herpes simplex virus-1 and -2, varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus and enteroviruses. However, the patient had positive serology for snowshoe hare virus and Jamestown Canyon virus IgM antibody using an IgM-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in both serum and CSF specimens collected 2 and 6 days after the onset of symptoms, respectively. Neutralizing antibodies to Jamestown Canyon virus were detected in the patient's sera with a titre of more than 80, but were negative for snowshoe hare virus by the Jamestown Canyon virus/snowshoe hare virus plaque reduction neutralization test at the National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg. These results were consistent with an acute neuroinvasive Jamestown Canyon virus infection. The patient's symptoms resolved the day of his 2nd presentation to the emergency department. He had no further episodes of numbness, tingling, or headache during his stay in hospital. He was subsequently discharged home 5 days after admission. When seen for follow-up about 2 months later, he remained clinically well, with no long-term sequelae related to the infection.

Discussion
----------
Jamestown Canyon virus is an arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) belonging to the California serogroup within the genus _Orthobunyavirus_ and Bunyaviridae family of viruses. In nature, Jamestown Canyon virus is maintained in an enzootic transmission cycle involving amplifying host or reservoir animals and mosquito vectors. The primary amplifying host animals are white-tailed deer and other free-ranging ungulates, including moose and bison. Non-_Culex_ mosquitos (such as _Aedes_, _Culiseta_, _Anopheles_) are the main vectors, and the virus can be passed on to progeny by transovarial transmission. Jamestown Canyon virus is found in the saliva of infected mosquitoes, and transmission to humans (and other animals) may occur when an infected mosquito takes a blood meal.

Clinical cases have been identified in various provinces across Canada, including British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. In 2016, there were 24 laboratory-confirmed California serogroup virus cases or exposures diagnosed by the National Microbiology Laboratory. Recent serologic surveys suggest that exposure to Jamestown Canyon virus among residents in many parts of Canada is not uncommon.

It is thought that most infections with Jamestown Canyon virus are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infection can present as a nonspecific febrile illness or a neuroinvasive syndrome including meningitis or encephalitis. Meningitis is characterized by fever, headache, neck stiffness, and pleocytosis on examination of CSF. Patients with encephalitis may present with fever, headache, and altered mental status. Acute flaccid paralysis is not commonly reported. Neuroinvasive disease has been documented in about 55 percent of patients in recent case series. However, this likely reflects a bias toward preferential testing in patients presenting with evidence of a central nervous system infection. Treatment of infection is supportive. Death related to Jamestown Canyon virus infection is uncommon. In some cases of encephalitis, long-term neurologic sequelae have been documented, including persisting cognitive deficits.

The clinical presentation of this patient's case was unusual, in that it mimicked a migraine with aura. For our patient, the prolonged duration of aura and the finding of papilledema on physical examination were atypical of primary migraine, prompting additional diagnostic testing. We found one previous report in the literature of a patient with Jamestown Canyon virus infection that was initially misdiagnosed as a complex migraine. That patient presented with severe frontal headache, dizziness, and left-sided numbness and tingling. However, he also had a fever, providing a clue as to the infectious cause of his symptoms.

Neuroinvasive infections due to Jamestown Canyon virus are infrequently reported in Canada, despite data supporting that a large part of the population is at risk for exposure. The paucity of reported cases is likely related, at least in part, to a large number of infections being subclinical or presenting with nonspecific symptoms, such as fever, that resolve spontaneously. However, a general lack of awareness of the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of infection among health care providers may contribute to the low number of reported cases. For patients who present with aseptic meningitis or encephalitis between April and October, consideration should be given to testing for California serogroup viruses, particularly when another cause (such as West Nile virus, herpesvirus, enteroviruses) has not been clearly identified.

--
Communicated by:
Kamran Kadkhoda PhD
Cadham Provincial Laboratory, Winnipeg
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
Department of Immunology,
Max Rady College of Medicine, University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, Manitoba
Canada
<kamrankadkhoda@gmail.com>

[It seems odd that despite many reports of Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV) infections in Canada cited in the article above, this is the 1st report of JCV infection that ProMED-mail has posted. JCV cases have been reported recently in the northeastern states of the USA neighboring eastern Canada, so finding cases in ecologically similar provinces in Canada is not surprising. Clinically, this is a very unusual case with its migraine-like presentation. ProMED-mail readers interested in all the clinical details can find them in the full report above. - Mod.TY

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5675310,278]
See Also
2017
----
Jamestown Canyon virus - USA (04): (NH) 20171001.5353849
Jamestown Canyon virus - USA (03): (ME) 20170827.5276954
Jamestown Canyon virus - USA (02): (NH) 20170819.5261935
Jamestown Canyon virus - USA (ME) 20170713.5173201
2015
----
Jamestown Canyon virus - USA: (IA) 20150829.3611028
2013
----
Jamestown Canyon & Powassan viruses - USA: (NH) coinfection, RFI 20130802.1860724
2011
----
Jamestown Canyon virus, human - USA: (MT) 20110527.1630
2008
----
Jamestown Canyon virus, human - USA (MS) 20081016.3285
2004
----
Jamestown Canyon virus, mosquitoes - USA (NY) (05) 20040809.2197
Jamestown Canyon virus, mosquitoes - USA (NY) (04) 20040808.2187
Jamestown Canyon virus, mosquitoes - USA (NY) (03) 20040807.2171
Jamestown Canyon virus, mosquitoes - USA (NY) (02) 20040806.2153
Jamestown Canyon virus, mosquitoes - USA (NY) 20040805.2137
.................................................sb/lxl/ty/mj/lxl
</body>
