<header id=057010>
Published Date: 2015-10-02 13:26:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Q fever - USA, Canada: ex Germany (RP) sheep cell therapy, 2014
Archive Number: 20151002.3684869
</header>
<body id=057010>
Q FEVER - USA, CANADA: ex GERMANY (RHINELAND-PALATINATE) SHEEP CELL THERAPY, 2014
*********************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 2 Oct 2015
Source: CDC. Morb Mortal Week Rep (MMWR) 64(38);1071-1073 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6438a3.htm?s_cid=mm6438a3_w


Q fever outbreak among travelers to Germany who received live cell therapy -- United States and Canada, 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------
During September-November 2014, the New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH) [USA] was notified of 5 New York state residents who had tested seropositive for _Coxiella burnetii_, the causative agent of Q fever. All 5 patients had symptoms compatible with Q fever (such as fever, fatigue, chills, and headache) and a history of travel to Germany to receive a medical treatment called "live cell therapy" (sometimes called "fresh cell therapy") in May 2014. Live cell therapy is the practice of injecting processed cells from organs or fetuses of nonhuman animals (for example, sheep) into human recipients (1). It is advertised to treat a variety of health conditions. This practice is unavailable in the USA, however, people can travel to foreign locations to receive injections.

Local health departments interviewed the patients, and NYSDOH notified the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and posted a report on CDC's Epidemic Information Exchange to solicit additional cases. Clinical and exposure information for each patient was reported to the Robert Koch Institute in Germany, which forwarded the information to local health authorities. A Canada resident who also received live cell therapy in May 2014 was diagnosed with Q fever in July 2014. Clinicians should be aware of health risks, such as Q fever and other zoonotic diseases, among patients with a history of receiving treatment with live cell therapy products.

The 5 New York patients had traveled in a group of 10-15 people to the state of Rhineland-Palatinate in Germany to receive intramuscular injections of fetal sheep cells from a German physician on 30 May 2014. A Canada resident, who received intramuscular injections of fetal sheep cells from the same German physician on 28 May 2014, sought medical care in June 2014 for fever, pain, and erythema at the site of the injection. She received a diagnosis of Q fever in July 2014, and public health authorities were notified. Under International Health Regulations, the Public Health Agency of Canada notified German authorities in September 2014. At the time of notification, the ministry of health of the federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate was investigating an outbreak of human Q fever associated with inhalation exposure to a sheep flock that was used for production of fetal sheep cell injections by the German physician.

In September 2014, the German physician notified patients treated during January-July 2014 of their potential Q fever exposure. This prompted Q fever testing of the 5 patients in New York, 3 of whom had already sought medical care for symptoms. The other 2 patients had experienced symptoms but had not sought medical care until notification of their potential Q fever exposure. The test results, with positive Q fever titers, were reported to NYSDOH and prompted investigation by local health departments. No additional USA or Canada residents with positive Q fever titers and history of intramuscular injections of fetal sheep cells in Germany have been identified. The identities and nationalities of the other people in the travel group are unknown to USA and Canadian public health authorities. It is not known whether the other people did not get tested for Q fever, tested negative, or did not report an exposure to fetal sheep cell injections.

An outbreak-associated case of Q fever was defined as an illness consisting of clinical signs and symptoms compatible with Q fever, and a single IgG titer equal to or greater than 1:128 to _C. burnetii_ phase II antigen by immunofluorescence assay in a person who received live cell therapy in Germany during May 2014 (2). Among the 6 identified cases, the median patient age was 62 years (range = 59-83 years). 4 of the 6 patients were female. None of the patients reported other potential exposures to Q fever, with the exception of 1 patient who reported contact with sheep horn or bone. 3 patients reported preexisting medical conditions: one patient with atrial fibrillation and kidney stones, one patient with Parkinson disease and osteoarthritis, and one patient with multiple sclerosis.

Signs and symptoms of Q fever began within about 1 week of receipt of the intramuscular injections of fetal sheep cells. The majority of symptoms were reported as lasting 10-90 days; however, 9-10 months after exposure, 3 patients continued to report symptoms of fatigue, chills, sweats, and difficulty sleeping (Table 1 [for table, see source URL - Mod.LL]). One patient had initially reported no symptoms during an interview with the local health department after his positive titers were reported in November 2014; however, in February 2015, he informed his physician that symptoms had been occurring since the injections in May 2014.

The patients were tested for Q fever phase I and phase II antibodies at 2-6 months after exposure, using indirect immunofluorescence assay. _C. burnetii_ undergoes antigenic phase variation, between a virulent phase I form and an avirulent phase II form. During acute infection, phase II antibodies appear 1st and are higher than phase I antibodies. All patients' phase I IgG titers were elevated (1:512-1:2048), but were lower than phase II IgG titers (1:4096-1:65 536), suggesting acute disease. Phase I IgM titers were elevated in 4 patients (1:128-1:8192) and phase II IgM titers were elevated in all patients (1:64-1:32 768). All patients were treated with doxycycline after receiving a diagnosis of Q fever.

All 6 patients were initially interviewed by their local health departments; only 2 of the 5 New York patients agreed to a follow-up interview by NYSDOH. The 2 patients reported that a group had traveled to Germany for injections twice each year for the past 5 years. They chose to receive injections of fetal sheep cells to improve their general health and vitality, and had not previously experienced signs or symptoms of illness after injections. They reported that they were not informed of a risk for Q fever infection before injection.

Discussion
----------
The treatment known as live cell therapy was developed in Switzerland during the 1930s by Paul Niehans. Practitioners have used organs, glands, and fetuses of multiple species, including sheep, cows, and sharks (1). No published clinical evidence supporting therapeutic claims of the treatment known as live cell therapy is available. It is advertised as having anti-aging effects and as a treatment for multiple conditions and diseases (for example, erectile dysfunction, depression, and joint, neurologic, heart, kidney, lung, endocrine, and liver disease). Serious adverse events have been reported, including anaphylaxis, vasculitis, encephalitis, polyradiculitis, clostridial infections, paresis, and death (3-5).

The treatment known as live cell therapy is a type of xenotransplantation when it involves administration of live cells from a nonhuman animal source into a human recipient (6). Xenotransplantation carries a public health risk for transmission of known and unknown infectious agents from the donor organism to the human recipient and possible recombination or reassortment to form new pathogens (6). There is a theoretic potential for dissemination of disease from the original recipient to others. For this reason, discussions on safety requirements for xenotransplantation by international and domestic public health agencies continue to occur (7).

Regulation of xenotransplantation varies among countries. In the USA, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates xenotransplantation products as Biologic Drugs under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act and the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. FDA approval of a Biologics License Application (BLA) is required to introduce, or deliver for introduction, a biologic product into interstate commerce. FDA has not approved a BLA for a xenotransplantation product known as live cell therapy. If a xenotransplantation product is proposed for use in a clinical investigation in the USA, an Investigational New Drug Application would be required. In Canada, xenotransplantation cell therapy products are regulated as drugs under the Food and Drugs Act and the Food and Drug Regulations. Authorities in Canada have not authorized for sale any xenotransplantation products, nor have any clinical trials that involve xenotransplantation been authorized. In Germany, xenotransplantation products are regulated under the Medicinal Products Act; however, an attempt to ban fresh cell therapy in 1997 was later determined to be null and void because the federal law does not cover drugs manufactured by doctors only for use in their own patients (8). According to an assessment supported by WHO and its partners, during January 1994-September 2009, xenotransplantation procedures were identified in 12 different countries, of which 9 had no clear national regulations on xenotransplantation (9).

This outbreak highlights one of the public health issues associated with xenotourism, the travel outside a country of residence for the purpose of participating in xenotransplantation programs. FDA recommends that xenotransplantation product recipients enrolled in research studies remain under lifelong surveillance with periodic clinical and laboratory monitoring and that both they and their intimate contacts refrain from blood and tissue donation (6). However, other than self-reporting, no method to identify returned xenotourists is available. Clinicians should be aware of xenotourism and consider the potential for zoonotic disease in a patient with a history of xenotransplantation.

References
----------
1. US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment: Unconventional cancer treatments, OTA-H-405. Washington, DC: US Governmental nt Printing Office; 1990.
2. CDC. Notes from the field: Q fever outbreak associated with goat farms -- Washington and Montana, 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011;60:1393.
3. Bohl J, Goebel HH, Potsch L, et al. Complications following cell therapy. Z Rechtsmed 1989;103:1-20.
4. Goebel HH, Walther G, Meuth M: Fresh cell therapy followed by fatal coma. J Neurol 1986;233:242-7.
5. The Lancet. Cell therapy suspended. Lancet 1987;330:503.
6. Center for Biologics and Research. Guidance for industry: source animal, product, preclinical, and clinical issues concerning the use of xenotransplantation products in humans. US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center for Biologics and Research; 2003. Available at http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/Xenotransplantation/ucm074354.htm
7. World Health Organization. Second WHO Global Consultation on Regulatory Requirements for Xenotransplantation Clinical Trials. Geneva, Switzerland; October 17-19, 2011. Available at http://www.who.int/transplantation/xeno/report2nd_global_consultation_xtx.pdf
8. Federal Constitutional Court. Ban on fresh cell production is void. Bund has no regulatory powers. Press release No. 18/2000; February 16, 2000 [German]. Available at http://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Pressemitteilungen/DE/2000/bvg00-018.html
9. Sgroi A, Buhler LH, Morel P, Sykes M, Noel L. International human xenotransplantation inventory. Transplantation 2010;90:597-603.

[authors: Robyn MP, Newman AP, Arnato M, et al]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The Canadian case appeared to be the "bellwether" to the discovery of _Coxiella burnetii_ in a flock of sheep used for the "therapy" and the report of Q fever in a doctor preparing the cells. The circumstantial evidence for this route of infection seems quite strong.

The following is a warning regarding this non-traditional therapy from the American Cancer Society (http://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatmentsandsideeffects/complementaryandalternativemedicine/pharmacologicalandbiologicaltreatment/cell-therapy):

"Cell therapy
Other common name(s): cellular therapy, fresh cell therapy, live cell therapy, glandular therapy, xenotransplant therapy

"Description: in cell therapy, processed tissue from the organs, embryos, or fetuses of animals such as sheep or cows is injected into patients. Cell therapy is promoted as an alternative form of cancer treatment.

"Overview: available scientific evidence does not support claims that cell therapy is effective in treating cancer or any other disease. Serious side effects can result from cell therapy. It may in fact be lethal -- several deaths have been reported. It is important to distinguish between this alternative method involving animal cells and mainstream cancer treatments that use human cells, such as bone marrow transplantation.

"How is it promoted for use? In cell therapy, live or freeze-dried cells or pieces of cells from the healthy organs, fetuses, or embryos of animals such as sheep or cows are injected into patients. This is supposed to repair cellular damage and heal sick or failing organs. Cell therapy is promoted as an alternative therapy for cancer, arthritis, heart disease, Down syndrome, and Parkinson disease.

"Cell therapy is also marketed to counter the effects of aging, reverse degenerative diseases, improve general health, increase vitality and stamina, and enhance sexual function. Some practitioners have proposed using cell therapy to treat AIDS patients.

"The theory behind cell therapy is that the healthy animal cells injected into the body can find their way to weak or damaged organs of the same type and stimulate the body's own healing process. The choice of the type of cells to use depends on which organ is having the problem. For instance, a patient with a diseased liver may receive injections of animal liver cells. Most cell therapists today use cells taken from taken from the tissue of animal embryos.

"Supporters assert that after the cells are injected into the body, they are transported directly to where they are most needed. They claim that embryonic and fetal animal tissue contains therapeutic agents that can repair damage and stimulate the immune system, thereby helping cells in the body heal.

"The alternative treatment cell therapy is very different from some forms of proven therapy that use live human cells. Bone marrow transplants infuse blood stem cells -- from the patient or a carefully matched donor -- after the patient's own bone marrow cells have been destroyed. Studies have shown that bone marrow transplants are effective in helping to treat several types of cancer. In another accepted procedure, damaged knee cartilage can be repaired by taking cartilage cells from the patient's knee, carefully growing them in the laboratory, and then injecting them back into the joint. Approaches involving transplants of other types of human stem cells are being studied as a possible way to replace damaged nerve or heart muscle cells, but these approaches are still experimental.

"What does it involve? First, healthy live cells are harvested from the organs of juvenile or adult live animals, animal embryos, or animal fetuses. These cells may be taken from the brain, pituitary gland, thyroid gland, thymus gland, liver, kidney, pancreas, spleen, heart, ovaries, testicles, or even from whole embryos. Patients might receive one or several types of animal cells. Some cell therapists inject fresh cells into their patients. Others freeze them first, which kills the cells, and they may filter out some of the cell components. Frozen cell extracts have a longer "shelf life" and can be screened for disease. Fresh cells cannot be screened. A course of cell therapy to address a specific disease might require several injections over a short period of time, whereas cell therapy designed to treat the effects of aging and "increase vitality" may involve injections received over many months.

"Animal cell extracts are also sold in pill form as dietary supplements, usually called glandular supplements. These, too, allegedly travel to organs of the same kind in the body to promote healing.

"What is the history behind it? The Swiss physician Paul Niehans, MD, invented cell therapy in 1931. During a medical emergency, Dr Niehans injected a solution containing ground-up parathyroid cells from a calf into a patient who had damaged parathyroid glands. The patient recovered, and Dr Niehans attributed the improvement to the injection. He went on to apply the idea of animal-human cellular transfer to other diseases.

"Dr Niehans claimed that he treated more than 30 000 patients with cell therapy. He also claimed that the death rate from cancer among his patients who received cell therapy was 5 times less than that of the average population. He believed that injections of cells from animals resistant to cancer would increase cancer resistance in humans. A 2nd physician announced similar findings 30 years later. Neither claim has ever been supported by research studies published in medical journals.

"Cell therapy may be harmful and is not legally available in the United States. Because of safety concerns and lack of proof of its effectiveness, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has banned the import of cell therapy products into the country. The treatment is provided in clinics and spas in Europe, Mexico, and the Bahamas.

"What is the evidence? None of the therapeutic success claimed by cell therapists has been documented through scientific testing and published in peer-reviewed medical journals. Claims of the therapy's success take the form of individual cases, testimonials, and publicity issued by practitioners of the therapy. Even supporters of cell therapy admit they do not know how cell therapy works in the body. No reliable evidence has been published in medical journals to support the claims of cell therapy.

"Are there any possible problems or complications? These substances may have not been thoroughly tested to find out how they interact with medicines, foods, or dietary supplements. Even though some reports of interactions and harmful effects may be published, full studies of interactions and effects are not often available. Because of these limitations, any information on ill effects and interactions below should be considered incomplete.

"Cell therapy may be dangerous, and several patient deaths linked to the therapy have been reported in the medical literature. Patients can contract bacterial and viral infections carried by the animal cells, and some have had life-threatening and even fatal allergic reactions. Other reports list complications such as brain swelling or the immune system attacking blood vessels or nerves following cellular treatment. Serious immune system reactions resulting in death have also been reported. Women who are pregnant or breast-feeding should not use this method, as its possible effects on a fetus are unknown." - Mod.LL

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3684869,9631.]
See Also
2014
---
Q fever - Canada (02): ex Germany (RP) sheep cell therapy 20141014.2863025
Q fever - Germany: (RP) ovine, control, vaccination, RFI 20141007.2839528
Q fever - Canada: ex Germany, sheep cell therapy, RFI 20141006.2828583
Q fever - Germany: (BY) human, animal 20140511.2464862
2011
---
Q fever - Germany (02): (NW, HE) background 20110225.0620
Q fever - Germany: (NW, HE) human, animal 20110223.0604
2002
---
Q fever, human, sheep, vaccine - Germany (02) 20020629.4632
Q fever, human, sheep, vaccine - Germany: background 20020627.4616
Q fever, human, sheep, vaccine - Germany: RFI 20020626.4607
.................................................ll/je/sh
</body>
