<header id=044439>
Published Date: 2015-08-11 01:11:29 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Toxic algae - China (AH)
Archive Number: 20150811.3570037
</header>
<body id=044439>
TOXIC ALGAE - CHINA (ANHUI)
***************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 10 Aug 2015
Source: The Statesman [edited]
http://www.thestatesman.com/news/science-and-tech/blue-algae-outbreak-threatens-china-s-fifth-largest-lake/81558.html


Environment authorities in eastern China's Anhui province are battling an intense blue algae outbreak in Chaohu lake, the country's 5th largest fresh water lake, as they struggle to ensure clean water for local residents, the media reported on Monday. Blue algae grew by as much as 852 per cent from the normal level and it has been hard to contain, said Zhu Yu, deputy director of environment monitoring centre in Anhui.

The algae, which usually blooms in summer amid warm temperature, were found in the lake, the Global Times reported. "We are closely watching the water quality. Microcystin, a toxin which threatens drinking water, has not been detected. We have also stepped up purifying procedure to ensure clean water supply," Zhu said. Emergency water supply is ready, Zhu said. About 50 000 tonnes of water can be supplied from other water sources in 10 days.

He Zequn, deputy director of environment protection department, said Chaohu's blue algae blight has eased over the last few years, but this year it has relapsed. Over 220 million yuan (about USD 35 million) has been spent to contain blue algae this year.

About 120 000 tonnes of blue algae have been collected. "The relapse is a new warning to us. We have to keep up the efforts," the deputy director added.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Although the source cited for this article is in English, I cannot help but wonder if there is a translation error. I have never heard of nor could I find a reference to blue algae. Rather, there are lots of references for blue-green algae. There is also a mention here of _Microcystis_, which is a genus of blue-green algae.

There are a number of different species of blue-green algae or cyanobacteria, many of which may be lethal. Blue-green algae harmful algal blooms (HABs) in freshwater lakes and ponds occur when specific types of photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae) form blooms (visible, dense build-ups). Under certain conditions, these may produce harmful toxins.

It is not easy to tell if a bloom will produce toxins harmful to human health or animals. Large populations of blue-green algae may be required to produce toxins at a high enough level to affect those using the water for drinking or recreational use. Laboratory analysis of a water sample is needed to confirm the presence of toxins.

Blue-green algae may have the appearance of green and white spilled paint. It may also appear as a light sheen on the surface of the water.

Blooms may be triggered by a combination of water and environmental conditions, including:
- excess nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen)
- sunlight
- low-water or low-flow conditions
- calm water
- warmer temperatures
- upwellings
Blue-green algae blooms can alter lake ecosystems by:
- reducing oxygen levels
- preventing the growth of beneficial algae
- producing toxins that are directly harmful to fish and other organisms

Blue-green algae cells may produce toxins; however, the toxins are not always produced, and what controls toxin production is poorly understood. The toxins are released when the cells break open; this can happen naturally during die-off, when algaecides are applied, or in the stomach when ingested by people or animals. The toxins may be harmful to fish and other organisms. These nerve, liver, and skin toxins can also sicken people, pets, or livestock if consumed or ingested in large quantities, and can cause rashes or other allergic reactions.

Blue-green algae are sometimes referred to as "pond scum". Blue-green algae are most often blue-green in color, but can also be blue, green, reddish-purple, or brown. Blue-green algae generally grow in lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams when the water is warm and enriched with nutrients like phosphorus or nitrogen.

When environmental conditions are just right, blue-green algae can grow very quickly in number. Most species are buoyant and will float to the surface, where they form scum layers or floating mats. When this happens, we call this a "blue-green algae bloom". Blue-green algae blooms generally occur between mid-June and late September, although in rare instances, blooms have been observed in winter, even under the ice.

Many different species of blue-green algae occur in Minnesota waters, but the most commonly detected include _Anabaena_ spp, _Aphanizomenon_ spp, _Microcystis_ spp, and _Planktothrix_ spp. It is not always the same species that blooms in a given water body, and the dominant species present can change over the course of the season.

Blue-green algal toxins are naturally produced chemical compounds that sometimes are produced inside the cells of certain species of blue-green algae. These chemicals are not produced all of the time and there is no easy way to tell when blue-green algae are producing them and when they are not. When the cells are broken open, the toxins may be released. Sometimes this occurs when the cells die off naturally and they break open as they sink and decay in a lake or pond. Cells may also be broken open when the water is treated with chemicals meant to kill algae, and when cells are swallowed and mixed with digestive acids in the stomachs of people or animals.

Typical clinical signs in dogs exposed to blue-green algae include seizures, vomiting, and/or diarrhea after contact with surface water. Although the water appeared clear, if a "bloom" is just starting, it may be difficult to see any sheen, an early indication of blue-green algae formation. Some forms of blue-green algae may start forming slightly below the surface, and may not be visible, but are just as toxic.

One toxic alga frequently involved in illness and deaths is _Microcystis aeruginosa_, a single-celled blue green alga, or cyanobacterium, that occurs naturally in surface waters. Microcystis can proliferate to form dense blooms and mats under certain conditions. Many variants of these cyanobacteria produce multiple toxins, including the potent liver toxin, microcystin. When microcystis die, their cells break open, releasing the toxin microcystin into the water. Ingestion of water or algal cells containing microcystin has produced adverse effects in fish, dogs, cats, livestock, and humans. Sometimes the mats and the sheen of the organisms are visible on the surface of the water, if it is a pond. In larger bodies of water, such as large lakes, it may be more difficult or impossible to see the sheen or the mat of accumulation.

People swimming in dense microcystis blooms have experienced irritation such as skin rashes, burns, and blistering of the mouth. Ingestion or inhalation of water containing dense bloom material may cause vomiting, nausea, headaches, diarrhea, pneumonia, and fever. Ingestion of significant levels of the toxin microcystin can cause liver damage and dysfunction in humans and animals. No deaths from ingestion of microcystins have been reported in humans in the United States, but Brazil has reported human deaths. Dogs, wildlife, and livestock have died following exposure to this toxin.

Microcystis blooms typically thrive in warm, turbid, and slow-moving waters. The blooms with the highest biomass occur in waters that are high in nitrogen or phosphorus (eutrophic waters). Microcystis also requires sufficient light intensity to conduct photosynthesis, which results in blooms.

The commonest route of exposure to microcystin is drinking water followed by recreational exposures and food supplements. Typical water treatment processes do not fully remove microcystin that might be present in drinking water supplies stored in reservoirs. Swimming and playing in water that contains, or recently contained, microcystis blooms is another common exposure route. Children have the highest risk of exposure since they tend to unintentionally ingest water while swimming. Microcystin can move through the aquatic food web, exposing fish and shellfish, as well as the people who consume them. Microcystin does not remain in edible fish and shellfish tissues for more than a few weeks. However, people who frequently consume sport fish caught from a water body that supports microcystis blooms have a higher risk of exposure. Dogs can ingest large amounts of microcystis cells when they clean their coats after playing in water. Livestock, wildlife, and dogs are exposed through drinking water and containing microcystis or ingesting algal mats.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://oehha.ca.gov/ecotox/pdf/microfactsheet122408.pdf and http://www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/77140.html - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3570037,258.]
See Also
2015
---
Toxic algae - USA (02): (MN) alert 20150704.3484283
Toxic algae - USA: (MN) pet deaths, alert 20150616.3440485
2013
---
Toxic algae, municipal water - USA: (OH) 20130916.1946699
Toxic algae, fish - USA: (MT) 20130910.1934702
Undiagnosed die-off, manatee - USA: (FL) toxic algae susp. 20130329.1609882
2009
---
Toxic algae, avian die-off - USA 20091215.4250
Toxic algae, canine - UK: (England) 20090704.2406
2006
---
Toxic algae - Italy 20060803.2151
2005
---
Toxic algae - UK (England): alert 20050714.2013
2004
---
Flamingo die-off - Tanzania (Lake Manyara)(02): Toxic algae 20041019.2837
Toxic algae - USA (WA) 20041003.2725
Toxic algae - USA (NE): alert 20040702.1769
2003
---
Toxic algae, whales - USA (MA) 20030813.2013
Toxic algae, whales - USA (Maine) 20030804.1911
Toxic algae - USA, Canada 20030804.1910
2001
---
Toxic algae, alligators - USA (Florida) 20010906.2124
.................................................sb/sb/tg/pg/sh
</body>
