<header id=043653>
Published Date: 2012-06-16 14:28:59 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Measles update 2012 (24)
Archive Number: 20120616.1170461
</header>
<body id=043653>
MEASLES UPDATE 2012 (24)
************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
Europe
-----
[1] Germany (D4-Hamburg)
[2] UK (Merseyside)
[3] UK (HPA)

****
[1] Germany (D4-Hamburg)
Date: Thu 14 Jun 2012
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 17, Issue 24, Surveillance and Outbreak Reports [abbrev., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20194.


Description of measles D4-Hamburg outbreak in Hamburg, Germany, December 2008 to June 2009, which disproportionally affected a local Roma community
------------------------------------------
(By: Hegasy G, Katzner K, Helle M, Mankertz A, Baumgarte S, Wille A, Fell G.)

Summary
-------
From December 2008 to June 2009 a measles outbreak occurred in the Federal State of Hamburg, Germany. The outbreak affected 216 persons and was caused by a new measles strain termed D4-Hamburg which led to consecutive outbreaks between 2009 and 2011 in at least 12 European countries. Here, we describe epidemiological characteristics of the outbreak and evaluate the control measures taken in Hamburg. In one of the 7 boroughs of Hamburg a local Roma community comprised more than 50 percent of the notified cases. We compared in a stratified analysis the age distribution of these cases with cases of fellow citizens who did not belong to the Roma community. The age group of infants (0-11 months) comprised 33 percent among the non-Roma measles cases, where as in the Roma community only 4 percent belonged to this stratum. In the stratum of 5-17 year-olds only 8 percent were affected among the non-Roma cases, whereas in the Roma community 50 percent belonged to this age group. We discuss the influencing factors that might have led to this difference in age distribution between the 2 groups.

Background
----------
In December 2008 a measles outbreak started in the city of Hamburg, reached its peak during February and March 2009 and ended in June 2009 [1]. As demonstrated later by molecular typing, this outbreak was the origin of European-wide spread of a measles strain closely related to D4-Enfield, but later classified as a separate strain on the basis of sequence analysis. Consequently this strain was named D4 Hamburg. The spread of this D4-Hamburg virus continued in Europe in the following 3 years and led to consecutive outbreaks in Bulgaria, Poland, Ireland, Northern Ireland, Austria, Greece, Romania, Turkey, Macedonia, Serbia, Switzerland and Belgium with over 25 000 persons infected [2].

The surveillance data on the D4-Hamburg outbreak concerning age, vaccination status and hospitalisation rate of cases have been published earlier [1,2]. The age range of cases was 1 day to 54 years; the mean age was 14.6 years and the median age was 13.5 years. A vaccination card [record]was available for 196 of 216 cases (91%). Of these, 157 cases had no record of immunisation with measles-containing vaccine (MCV), including 28 cases below the recommended vaccination age of 11 months. Of 39 cases with a record of MCV immunisation, one dose was documented for 33 cases, 2 doses for 3 cases, and for 3 cases the record was ambiguous. Of the 33 cases with one documented dose, 26 were contacts who had received a combined measles-mumps-rubella vaccine (MMR) as post-exposure prophylaxis, but still developed the disease. No case fulfilled the criteria for application of passive protection using antiserum according to guidelines of the German Standing Committee on Vaccination (Standige Impfkommission, STIKO) [3]. The hospitalisation rate was 40%, with pneumonia and otitis media as the most frequent complications. No fatality was reported in this outbreak.

Measles virus infection has been a notifiable disease in Germany since 2001 according to the Communicable Disease Law Reform Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz, IfSG). Vaccination guidelines are provided by the STIKO, which is affiliated to the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) representing the federal institution for disease prevention and control in Germany. According to STIKO guidelines, a 1st dose of MCV should be given at the age of 11 to 14 months and a second dose at the age of 15 to 23 months, preferably using combined MMR vaccine [3]. For individuals missed in the regular schedule, catch-up vaccination is recommended. Since 2010, the STIKO has additionally recommended a single dose of MCV to be given to any person born after 1970 who has not received 2 doses of MCV or does not have a medical record of a subsided measles infection [4]. This decision to extend MCV immunisation to adults was taken as a result of continuing measles outbreaks in Germany, including the outbreak described here [5].

To meet the WHO European Region measles elimination target by 2015, a vaccination coverage of 95 percent for 2 doses of MCV is necessary [6]. According to assessment at school entry, adequate vaccination status has increased in Germany over the last 10 years, but coverage is still below this threshold (Germany 90.2 percent, Hamburg 90.5 percent) [7]. Furthermore, underserved minorities have repeatedly been involved in large outbreaks in Germany [8,9]. Here, we describe the measles outbreak in the Federal State of Hamburg in 2008-09, which disproportionally affected a local Roma community.

[Interested readers should access the original Eurosurveillance report for full details of the methodology, the analysis and the associated diagrams and reference. Only the discussion section is reproduced here]

Discussion
---------
For outbreak surveillance to be sufficient, 80 percent of clinically diagnosed measles cases should according to the World Health Organization's guidelines, be laboratory-confirmed [6]. In the outbreak described here, 149 of 216 cases (69 percent) were confirmed by laboratory analyses. Of these 100 were identified by PCR from nasopharyngeal swabs or oral fluid, representing 67 percent of the tests. These PCR diagnostics were offered during contact tracing and home visits by the public health departments and performed at the municipal Institute for Hygiene and Environment. In contrast to serological analyses as a standard tool for laboratory diagnosis of measles infection, taking of nasopharyngeal swabs or oral fluid for PCR is non-invasive and was easily performed by medical assistants. After arrival of the material at the Institute for Hygiene and Environment, PCR results were available within four to 24 hours and thus proved to be a fast and useful tool for laboratory confirmation of suspected cases found during contact tracing. The Institute for Hygiene and Environment offered PCR analyses free of charge to the public health departments in Hamburg which do not have a budget for laboratory analyses. Furthermore, availability of nasopharyngeal or oral fluid swab material was a prerequisite for genetic comparison of the strains by the NRC and identification of the epidemiological links of the D4-Hamburg virus in Europe [2]. In summary, free-of-charge PCR analyses provided a useful tool for rapid case identification, laboratory confirmation and genetic analysis of the measles strain in the D4-Hamburg outbreak.

To specifically reach the Roma community, home visits were paid to Roma patients and their household contacts. This approach was chosen because other attempts to establish contact with cases in the community were unsuccessful. As reported by the outbreak investigation teams, initial visits to a household were received with apprehension. On subsequent visits, members of the community stated that this may have been caused by an uncertainty to which public authority the team belonged and what their actual intention was. When a team member identified themselves as a physician they were met with more trust on further visits, and contact tracing and outbreak investigations became possible. During the home visits PCR diagnostics could be offered without delay, which allowed identification of a total of 19 cases that otherwise might not have been notified. Based on information gained during the visits the likely index patient of the outbreak was identified retrospectively and the initial transmission chain in the Roma community could be partially reconstructed. Furthermore, presence of a physician allowed on-site vaccinations in the Roma community. It is a shortcoming that no data were recorded on the number of vaccinations given on these visits, but this measure might have contributed to the fact that virus transmission stopped 9 weeks earlier in the Roma community than in the non Roma community of Hamburg-Mitte. In our experience, repeated home visits by a physician are an advisable approach to establish contact to this minority and to take immediate outbreak containment measures.

In a retrospective analysis we compared the age distribution of cases in the Roma community and the non-Roma community in the borough of Hamburg-Mitte. We considered the outbreak parameters as suitable for this comparison for two reasons: (i) number of cases and sex distribution were similar in both groups, (ii) both groups were citizens of the same borough, with 85 percent living in the same district as demonstrated by postcode analysis. No reliable figures exist on the size of this settled Roma community in Wilhelmsburg, but as an estimate, the community may comprise several hundred persons. It is a shortcoming of our analysis that no statistical reference figures are available to compare age-related incidences in the two subpopulations. Thus, our data only describe case numbers as they were recorded.

The most prominent differences occurred in the strata of 0-11 month- and 5-17 year-olds. In the non-Roma community, 33 percent of 0-11 month-olds were infected with measles, compared with only 4 percent of the Roma community. This age group consists of infants too young for MCV immunisation according to STIKO guidelines. Their immune protection correlates with the level and persistence of transferred maternal antibodies and may depend on whether the mother's immunity was acquired by natural infection or by vaccination [17]. Other factors modify this passive immunity, e.g., exposure to wildtype measles virus as a natural booster or age of the mother during pregnancy [18]. It is tempting to speculate that early protection in the Roma community described here may have been higher because the mothers were exposed to wildtype measles infection, but this hypothesis could only be verified if data on their measles immune status were available.

Only 8 percent of 5-17 year-olds were affected among the non-Roma citizens, compared with 50 percent in the Roma community. For this age group standard and catch-up vaccinations including MCV are recommended according to STIKO guidelines. There are 2 mandatory checkpoints in Hamburg for control of a child's vaccination status by a physician, the 1st on entry to kindergarten, the 2nd on entry to school. The 1st checkpoint is unlikely to reach children of a Roma community as they are usually parented by community members. At school entry the main focus is on controlling the vaccination record, and in case of undervaccination the parents are usually referred to their family doctor. This referral might be ineffective with members of a Roma community as they tend to make less use of standard health care and preventive services [19-21]. Thus, it is conceivable that the current approach to ensure adequate immunisation status of children in Hamburg is more effective in the non-Roma than the Roma population, in which undervaccinated children and adolescents may accumulate.

In other measles outbreaks in Europe involving Roma communities, the age distribution of cases differed between Roma and non-Roma citizens [22,23], although the results of these analyses are divergent. This might be explained by differences in the subpopulation analysed (e.g., Roma or Sinti), the living conditions of the subpopulation (e.g., settled or travelling), diversity in national vaccination schemes, and different approaches to implement vaccination programmes for underserved minorities.

The group of Roma has suffered extensively from this outbreak in Hamburg and in other European countries [24]. The D4-Hamburg outbreak demonstrates again that strategies to raise measles vaccination coverage should be specifically devised to target underserved populations. Furthermore, innovative outbreak containment measures and vaccination programmes are needed. In a review of the literature concerning the interaction between Roma communities and health service providers, Hajioff and McKee came to the conclusion that published research is sparse [25]. We suggest that studies are needed to better understand the view of Roma community members towards the health care sector in order to be able to create vaccination programmes that are acceptable to this neglected minority.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The Romani (Roma) are an ethnic group living mostly in Europe, who trace their origins to the Indian Subcontinent. Romani are widely known in the English-speaking world by the exonym Gypsies (or Gipsies). They are known collectively in the Romani language as Romane or Rromane (depending on the dialect concerned) and also as Romany, Romanies, Romanis, Roma or Roms. Romani are widely dispersed, with their largest concentrated populations in Europe, especially the Roma of Central and Eastern Europe and Anatolia, followed by the Kale of Iberia and Southern France (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romani_people).

To meet the WHO European Region measles elimination target by 2015, a vaccination coverage of 95 percent for 2 doses of MCV will be necessary. The above report demonstrates how difficult it will be to achieve this target even in such a well-ordered community as Germany.

Hamburg is the 2nd-largest city in Germany and the 6th-largest city in the European Union. The interactive HealthMap of Hamburg can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/2Ai6. - Mod.CP]

******
[2] UK (Merseyside)
Date: Wed 13 2012
Source: Wirral Globe [edited]
http://www.wirralglobe.co.uk/news/9758004.Measles_outbreak_prompts_surge_in_vaccinations/


Measles outbreak prompts surge in vaccinations
----------------------------------------
The measles outbreak has prompted a surge in vaccinations. Wirral parents have ensured their children are protected against measles following the region's biggest outbreak since 1988. The surge in uptake of the vaccine means more children than ever have had their 1st dose of the MMR jab by the age of 2. The increase in the number of children being protected against the disease comes after 301 cases were confirmed across Merseyside since January [2012], with a further 148 possible cases still under investigation.

Wirral has seen 10 confirmed cases of measles, while there have been 183 in Liverpool; 37 in Sefton and 42 in Knowsley. Dr. Roberto Vivancos, a consultant in communicable disease control with the HPA's Cheshire and Merseyside Health Protection Unit (HPU) said: "The response by parents has been extremely encouraging and MMR uptake rates across Merseyside are now the highest they've ever been.

"This has been the largest outbreak of measles in the North West since the introduction of MMR vaccine 24 years ago and it has demonstrated just why this vaccine is so important in protecting the public health. Parents of young children clearly value the protection, security and peace of mind that MMR vaccine affords, but there remains a pool of older children, teenagers and young adults who are not vaccinated and remain vulnerable to measles, mumps and German measles. "Our message to older teenagers and young adults is that if you were not vaccinated as children, it's not too late for you. You should speak to your family doctor about MMR vaccine because without its protection you will remain vulnerable to 3 potentially very serious diseases."

In addition to the current outbreak of measles in the Liverpool area, we have seen outbreaks of mumps in further education colleges and universities in recent years and if pregnant women should get German measles the consequences for the unborn child can be devastating. "Our message to parents of unvaccinated younger children and teenagers is to speak to the family doctor and arrange to have them vaccinated now."

Almost a 3rd of measles cases were teenagers over the age of 15 and young adults, while 70 were babies and toddlers under one who were too young to be vaccinated and were therefore vulnerable to infection from older contacts. The smallest number of cases (just 12) was recorded in children aged 40 to 60 months olds -- an age group which is currently well protected by 2 doses of MMR vaccine. Dr. Vivancos added: "It is a tribute to the hard work of the team here at Cheshire and Merseyside Health Protection Unit and to our colleagues in local NHS services that this outbreak was largely confined to Liverpool and neighbouring areas. Their efforts were immense. At one time we had an operations centre open 7 days a week."

[Byline: Stephanie Cureton]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A map of Merseyside can be accessed at: http://www.britishservices.co.uk/merseyside.htm. - Mod.CP]

******
[3] UK (HPA)
Date: Thu 14 Jun 2012
Source: FrenchTribune.com [edited]
http://frenchtribune.com/teneur/1211755-hpa-fears-rise-measles-cases


HPA Fears Rise In Measles Cases
---------------------------
In a recent report by the UK Health Protection Agency (HPA), it has been claimed that there has been a significant rise in the number of cases of measles. It was reflected after a large number of people took the MMR vaccine.

"We are encouraging older children, teenagers and young adults to come forward as well because we know that in previous years the take-up wasn't that good," said Dr. Roberto Vivancos, from the HPA, while making it all the more clear that there is need for more and more efforts to be made to get maximum people vaccinated against the disease. Among the total 301 confirmed cases of measles in Liverpool and connected areas, there were some 90 teenagers and that's what is making things all the more worrying for health authorities. All those who have yet not taken the vaccine are indeed at escalated risk of the disease. Apparently, children aged 40 to 60 months were found to be safest of all other age groups as they had taken the required 2 doses of the vaccine.

There are some 148 suspected cases of the same disease. There is dire need to control the situation before it goes out of hand and makes things all the more tough for the health authorities to handle.

[Byline: Nimisha Sachdev]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<prome@promedmail.org>
See Also
Measels update 2012 (23) 20120610.1163399
Measles update 2012 (22) 20120527.1146773
Measles update 2012 (21) 20120520.1139063
Measles update 2012 (20) 20120513.1131857
Measles update 2012 (15) 20120408.1094007
Measles update 2012 (10) 20120304.1060487
Measles update 2012 (05) 20120129.1025618
Measles update 2012 (01) 20120101.0004
.................................................sb/cp/ejp/dk
</body>
