<header id=025713>
Published Date: 2015-05-29 09:46:02 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anthrax - USA (04): laboratory error
Archive Number: 20150529.3394757
</header>
<body id=025713>
ANTHRAX - USA (04): LABORATORY ERROR
************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1] Forbes
[2] USA Today

******
[1] Forbes
Date:28 May, 2015
Source: Forbes [edited]
http://www.forbes.com/sites/judystone/2015/05/28/accidental-shipment-of-anthrax-exposes-flaws-in-safety-systems/


The recently announced accidental shipment of live anthrax spores by the U.S. military is a huge embarrassment, but no immediate public health threat, as anthrax is not spread person-to-person. The CDC and Pentagon announced that live anthrax specimens were inadvertently shipped from the Army's Dugway Proving Ground, in Utah, to California, Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and Wisconsin, and to South Korea.

"At least 18 labs in 9 states received sample kits containing 23 marked specimens and 2 controls," said CDC spokesman Jason McDonald. "One of the controls was labeled 'antigen 1.' It was, in fact, live anthrax spores. Notably, samples were reportedly sent by a commercial carrier to private and commercial labs involved in field-testing a diagnostic test, and were to be relayed to others. A private lab in Maryland expected an inactivated agent, but found they were able to grow live anthrax bacteria, prompting the initial report to the CDC.

What this incident, and prior accidents with agents that can be used for bioterrorism, illustrates are the flaws in the bioterrorism preparedness system safety engineering practice.

Background
----
Anthrax is [the disease resulting from] infection by _Bacillus anthracis_ bacteria. It is commonly found in the soil and infects a variety of animals, such as cattle, sheep, goats and deer.

People can become infected by breathing in spores, eating food that is contaminated, or getting spores into a cut or scrape. This cutaneous anthrax is the most common in the U.S. and is an occupational hazard of veterinarians, farmers, and in people butchering an infected carcass. Gastrointestinal disease occurs from eating inadequately cooked meat, generally in developing countries. Aerosol exposure used to be seen in wool and hair mills where contaminated sheep wool and goat hair were processed (woolsorter's or "Bradford" disease). There have been cases from drum hides. There was a suspected cluster of inhalational anthrax at a northern India hospital where I volunteered.

Anthrax and bioterrorism
------
According to the CDC, anthrax is a high-risk bioterrorism threat, because of its ease of dispersal. "In 2001, powdered anthrax spores were deliberately put into letters that were mailed through the U.S. postal system. 22 people, including 12 mail handlers, got anthrax, and 5 of these 22 people died." The resulting search for the culprit was another shameful fiasco. Dr. Steven Hatfill, former biodefense researcher for United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) at Fort Detrick, was wrongly accused and named a "person of interest" in the case by then Attorney General John Ashcroft. The Justice Department ultimately agreed to exonerate him and pay him $4.6 million to settle a lawsuit. The FBI then went after Dr. Bruce Ivins, another Ft. Detrick researcher. There is considerable doubt as to Dr. Ivins' guilt, too, but he committed suicide before the FBI charged him.

Yet before the "War on Terror," samples of anthrax could be purchased commercially and the CDC and American Type Culture Collection (ATTC) source of standard biological samples even sent Iraq 3 strains of anthrax, 6 strains of the bacterium that produces botulinum toxin, 3 strains of the bacteria that cause gas gangrene, and West Nile.

Current shipping incident
------
Little detail is known yet; DOD and CDC are not answering some of my questions. There are some interesting details and discrepancies gleaned from reading other stories, however. Dugway Proving Ground had irradiated a batch of anthrax, and then assumed that it was dead. The samples reportedly were shipped from Dugway on 30 Apr 2015, per initial reports. Suddenly, we are now told that these shipments, labeling samples mistakenly as inactive, have been going on since March 2014, leading one to wonder why it is being reported now.

Army Chief of Staff General Raymond Odierno just told reporters, "The best I can tell there was not human error." He added, "But we definitely believe no one is in danger. We believe we followed all the proper procedures."

Other accidents with bioterrorism agents
------
There have been 5 documented incidents in the past decade where the CDC improperly sent pathogens, including anthrax, botulism, and a virulent bird flu, to other labs. Additionally, there was a scare when vials of smallpox were unexpectedly found at NIH during 2014.

Just in 2014, the CDC had serious breach, similar to this one, in sending anthrax samples that they thought were inactivated to another lab, exposing 80 people. As a result of these errors, the CDC temporarily closed 2 of its labs. A review of that event illustrates several errors. Those anthrax samples were treated for 10 minutes and checked for sterility by plating them on culture media. No growth was seen after 24 hours, so the samples were declared sterile, though the existing protocol stated they were to be held for 48 hours. Unfortunately, it appears that someone took shortcuts, using unapproved sterilization techniques, and using a protocol that was developed for Brucella, on anthrax specimens. Testing of these techniques found them to be ineffective against anthrax spores.

In 2014 the Guardian reported finding 100 similar blunders at UK labs -- a rate of 1 every 3 weeks.

Errors and Systems Approach to Safety
-------
There are a number of commonalities and the same types of errors recur, suggesting that the entire procedure for handling select agents needs to be overhauled, and likely involving "fresh eyes."

Some of the problems noted include:
- There was lack of a procedural plan reviewed and approved at top levels.
- Use of unapproved sterilization techniques.
- Critically important, transfer of materials that were not confirmed to be inactive.
- Use of pathogenic _B. anthracis_ when non-pathogenic strains would have been appropriate.
- Lack of a standard operating procedure or process on inactivation and transfer to cover all procedures done with select agents.

I have a number of questions, including:

- Why were the samples not tested thoroughly to make sure they were inactivated? Does Dugway have a protocol to verify efficacy of their irradiation process? How is their equipment calibrated or checked? How often?

- Why were these samples being sent to lower level labs? I asked the CDC if the private labs were capable/have the safety equipment to handle anthrax. The response was, "Some were certified but most were not."

- If samples have been shipped since March 2014, why was this error only found now? Or why is it only being reported now, if found before?

- If this was a pathogenic strain, could a nonpathogenic one have been used instead? Was this altered in any way to enhance its virulence?

- Had lab workers been vaccinated against anthrax? A number of those exposed were placed on 60 days of Cipro, an antibiotic I dislike because of its side effects, especially CNS symptoms, nausea, vomiting, and risk of _C. difficile_ colitis.

Stephen Morse, Director of the Center for Public Health Preparedness at Columbia, suggested "checklists or their equivalent can be helpful if followed carefully," and redundancy, with 1 person checking on another, or multiple checks and safety plans.

Nancy Leveson, MIT professor and expert in safety engineering, noted to me that reviewers "probably will claim that they [the incidents] are all different, but everyone always says that because they only look at symptoms." Given that labs don't have the appropriate biohazard controls, "a thorough and total review of the controls needs to be made. If it is not possible to create adequate controls, then there needs to be a re-evaluation of the whole program involving biohazards and whether it or all of its activities are justified." She concluded, "3 times and you're out. Actually 1 time is enough here...This calls for an entire review of the program and the controls and protections...It will take even more incidents and then a major loss before they look deeply at this whole program. That's why there are always lots of similar incidents before a major accident."

In terms of post-exposure prophylaxis, Martin Hugh-Jones, an anthrax expert at LSU and the WHO, offered a novel perspective, given his distaste for Cipro, too. He recommended, "Frankly if you ever have an aerosol exposed individual [1] give them at least 3 days of doxy, and [2] vaccinate them 3 times at 2- to 3-week intervals. If you don't have the human vaccine, wait 10 days after the antibiotic and vaccinate them once with Sterne [a veterinary anthrax vaccine]. You only need one shot of Sterne; there will be some oedema at the injection site but it is safe for humans."

There's too much that we don't know at this time, so questions will evolve. We do know there is a pattern of accidental exposures to serious pathogens, causing considerable mistrust among the public and towards the military. Amesh Adalja, UPMC biosecurity expert, echoes this: "The impact of repeated biosafety lapses unfortunately may cause the general public to question the risk-benefit ratio of research on these agents for which many important research questions still exist and, in light of the non-zero risk of another attack, must be pursued."

I'm certainly in agreement with Dr. Leveson when she notes, "So if it is a procedures problem, they should not just investigate and fix the procedures. Systems thinking would require that they also examine why inadequate procedures were created and allowed to exist and how to prevent that in the future."

[Byline: Judy Stone <drjudystone@gmail.com>]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] USA Today
Date: 28 May 2015
Source: USA TODAY [edited]
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/05/28/biolabs-pathogens-location-incidents/26587505/


Vials of bioterror bacteria have gone missing. Lab mice infected with deadly viruses have escaped, and wild rodents have been found making nests with research waste. Cattle infected in a university's vaccine experiments were repeatedly sent to slaughter and their meat sold for human consumption. Gear meant to protect lab workers from lethal viruses such as Ebola and bird flu has failed, repeatedly.

A USA TODAY Network investigation reveals that hundreds of lab mistakes, safety violations and near-miss incidents have occurred in biological laboratories coast to coast in recent years, putting scientists, their colleagues and sometimes even the public at risk.

Oversight of biological research labs is fragmented, often secretive and largely self-policing, the investigation found. And even when research facilities commit the most egregious safety or security breaches -- as more than 100 labs have -- federal regulators keep their names secret.

Of particular concern are mishaps occurring at institutions working with the world's most dangerous pathogens in biosafety level 3 and 4 labs -- the 2 highest levels of containment that have proliferated since the 9/11 terror attacks in 2001. Yet there is no publicly available list of these labs, and the scope of their research and safety records are largely unknown to most state health departments charged with responding to disease outbreaks. Even the federal government doesn't know where they all are, the Government Accountability Office has warned for years.

A team of reporters who work for the USA TODAY Network of Gannett newspapers and TV stations identified more than 200 of these high-containment lab facilities in all 50 states and the District of Columbia operated by government agencies, universities and private companies. They're scattered across the country from the heart of New York City to a valley in Montana; from an area near Seattle's Space Needle to just a few blocks from Kansas City's Country Club Plaza restaurant and shopping district.

[Byline: Alison Young & Nick Penzenstadler]

[This is a long and detailed article. Members are encouraged to download it and read it at their leisure. It is too long for posting on ProMED. - Mod.MHJ]

--
Communicated by
Ross Getman <ross_getman@verizon.net>

[To quote my colleague Charlie Calisher, a respected arborvirus researcher of many years, "Irrespective of the official statement, unless the error was caused by an alien, it certainly was due to human error. Whether the error was due to a misunderstanding, or was of a technical sort, or for any other reason, this error was a human one." And they occur, sometimes more frequently than we would prefer, whatever our standards. As the press is in a feeding frenzy on this topic, unless something of real significance emerges this thread will be in aestivation. (It is summer time, right?). - Mod.MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax - USA (03): laboratory error 20150528.3392299
Anthrax - USA (02): laboratory error 20150527.3390230
2014
----
Anthrax - USA (12): CDC & other laboratories 20140720.2623914
Anthrax - USA (10): CDC director's report 20140713.2605501
Anthrax - USA (08): CDC lab exposure highly unlikely 20140702.2583211
Anthrax - USA (06): CDC laboratory exposure, environment neg. 20140624.2563149
Anthrax - USA (05): CDC laboratory exposure 20140623.2559920
Anthrax - USA (04): CDC laboratory exposure 20140620.2554615
Anthrax - USA (03): CDC laboratory exposure 20140619.2552800
2004
----
Anthrax, laboratory error - USA (CA) 20040611.1571
.................................................mhj/pg/mpp
</body>
