<header id=055970>
Published Date: 2013-06-26 06:01:17 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Bluetongue - Brazil: (RJ) ovine
Archive Number: 20130626.1792163
</header>
<body id=055970>
BLUETONGUE - BRAZIL: (RIO DE JANEIRO) OVINE
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 24 Jun 2013
Source: RuralBR [in Portuguese, trans., edited]
http://pecuaria.ruralbr.com.br/noticia/2013/06/surto-de-lingua-azul-doenca-rara-no-brasil-vitima-rebanho-de-99-ovinos-em-vassouras-rj-e-gera-prejuizos-4178426.html


A herd of 99 dairy sheep (ewes and rams) of the [French] Lacaune breed was the victim of bluetongue (BT), an uncommon disease in Brazil.

The outbreak occurred on a farm in the town of Vassouras in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and the diagnosis was made by veterinarians of Fluminense Federal University (UFF).

The case was reported this month [June 2013] by the Coordinator of Animal Protection of the State Department of Agriculture and Livestock and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA). 4 pregnant sheep died and 6 were seriously ill. Among the non-pregnant females, 37 were affected and are in the process of recovery; 16 male lambs were sick and 2 died.

The infectious disease is caused by bluetongue virus (BTV), of the family _Reoviridae_, genus _Orbivirus_, which has 26 different serotypes spread around the world. The disease mainly affects ruminants and camelids, among them cattle and sheep, the latter species being most sensitive to BT.

Bluetongue causes major economic losses for ranchers throughout the world. In the USA, losses are estimated at around USD 3 billion per year. The virus is transmitted by blood-sucking Diptera of the genus _Culicoides_, popularly known as maruim [in Portuguese] or sandflies. Transmission occurs through the bite of the insect, which increases the possibility of rapid disease spread.

According to Mario Balaro, of the Study, Research and Extension in Sheep and Goats (Gepeco by its initials in Portuguese) group at UFF, and one of the veterinarians responsible for the diagnosis, BT serotype 4 was found in the blood of the animals. Of great concern is that there is another center of production of sheep milk in Miguel Pereira, a city less than 20 kilometers (12 mi) from Vassouras. The risk of the disease spreading is great, even throughout the State of Rio de Janeiro. Balaro says it is necessary to adopt procedures for epidemiological control, which are nonexistent in Brazil because bluetongue disease is little known in Brazil and even considered rare.

Researchers at UFF believe the disease is endemic in the country but it has not been properly diagnosed, since its clinical symptoms may be confused with other illnesses. There were previously 3 cases recorded in 1980, 2001, and 2009, without any action having been taken by the Brazilian government.

Due to the lack of a prevention program in Brazil, Balaro prepared a suggested management plan for bluetongue, adapted from information collected from experts in England, Israel, Spain, Australia, and South Africa. The Gepeco-UFF presented the plan to the Secretary of Animal Protection of the State of Rio and it is under examination. It is not yet known whether the State Department of Agriculture and Livestock will adopt it as public policy. Already the Ministry of Agriculture will leave to the state government the decision on legislation and criteria employed for the containment of the disease.

While cattle rarely develop clinical signs, oxen and cows are also hosts of BTV and the virus can remain in the body of these animals for up to 4 months, and the disease is simply spread by sandfly bites. Mario Balaro says, that the main focus for containment of the disease are cattle, which, like infected sheep, need treatment, periodic serological testing, and remain in isolation. During that period, producers should be prevented from selling and transporting animals and commercializing their meat, milk, semen, or blood products until the serology gives a negative result.

In Europe and the United States, where BT has caused havoc, there is a vaccine against the disease, made from inactivated virus. All lambs and calves over 3 month old and adult animals with negative viremia are vaccinated. In addition, laboratory tests are required prior to the purchase and sale of cattle and sheep. Animals may only be transported from one place to another if the absence of BT virus in the blood is certified.

"Often when the animal reaches its destination, it is examined again, as the virus could be in a short period of incubation, which would make the previous result a false negative," says Balaro. In Brazil, these requirements do not exist.

Felipe Zandonadi Brandao, Professor of Veterinary Medicine and coordinator of Gepeco, claims that the BT vaccine is not produced in Brazil, and there is no authorization for marketing a vaccine.

"One of the aids that the Ministry of Agriculture can give is to authorize importation and marketing of the vaccine in Brazil. The main problem is that we don't have veterinarians trained to diagnose the disease," he added. Brandao clarified that bluetongue is not among the listed diseases for field veterinarians in Brazil and not usually taught in Brazilian schools. Hence the importance of the adoption of a control plan and a prevention policy not only at the state level, but also nationally.

Brandao explains that the disease is not a zoonosis and therefore, not a risk to humans. The problem is the drastic reduction in milk production in sheep, the slow growth and fattening of lambs, in addition to the death of animals, which cause great financial loss to producers.

The name bluetongue was assigned because of a characteristic sign in the diseased animals, though rarely manifest: the tongue is swollen and becomes cyanotic, of a bluish color. Other symptoms include high fever (between 41 and 42 deg C [105.8-107.6 deg F]), lesions in the mouth, salivation and nasal discharge, excessive redness (hyperemia) in the skin, puffy face, and loss of appetite. In the medium term, the animal is limping and with spinal column bowed, and starts limping because of pain and inflammation in the crown of the foot. The major causes of death are pulmonary edema caused by replication of the virus and secondary bacterial pneumonia.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-PORT
<promed-port@promedmail.org>

[Although it may exist, this moderator did not locate official information about the occurrence of the disease outbreak on the site of the Ministry of Agriculture of Brazil. Official information would, besides being necessary, be welcome. - Mod.RNA

Bluetongue is an insect-borne viral disease of ruminants. Among domestic animals, clinical disease occurs most often in sheep, and can result in significant morbidity. Affected sheep may have erosions and ulcerations on the mucous membranes, dyspnea, or lameness from muscle necrosis and inflammation of the coronary band. Some sheep may slough their hooves, and surviving animals can lose part or all of their wool. Some strains of the virus can result in mortality rates as high as 70 percent in highly susceptible sheep.

Bluetongue virus infects many domesticated and wild ruminants including sheep, goats, cattle, buffalo, deer, antelope, bighorn sheep, and North American elk. Clinical disease is seen often in sheep, occasionally in goats, and rarely in cattle. Severe disease can also occur in some wild ruminants including white-tailed deer (_Odocoileus virginianus_), pronghorn (_Antilocapra Americana_), and desert bighorn sheep (_Ovis canadensis_). In Africa, some large carnivores have antibodies to bluetongue, and, in the United States, a contaminated vaccine resulted in some abortions and deaths in pregnant dogs.

Bluetongue virus is transmitted by biting midges in the genus _Culicoides_. _Culicoides variipennis_ var _sonorensis_ is the principal vector in the United States, _C. brevitarsis_ in Australia, and _C. imicola_ in Africa and the Middle East. _C. imicola_ is also the major vector in southern Europe, but _C. dewulfi_ has been identified as the vector in the 2006 northern European outbreaks. Other _Culicoides_ species can also transmit the virus and may be important locally. Ticks or sheep keds can be mechanical vectors but are probably of minor importance in disease transmission. Cattle are the major amplifying host due to their prolonged viremia and the feeding preferences of many _Culicoides_ species.

Bluetongue is not a contagious disease; however, the virus can be spread mechanically on surgical equipment and needles. Bluetongue virus can be found in semen and venereal transmission from bulls is possible, but does not appear to be a major route of infection.

In sheep, the incubation period is usually 5 to 10 days. Cattle can become viremic starting at 4 days post-infection, but rarely develop symptoms. Animals are usually infectious to the insect vector for several weeks.

The vast majority of infections with bluetongue are clinically inapparent. In a percentage of infected sheep and occasionally other ruminants, more severe disease can occur.

In sheep, the clinical signs may include fever, excessive salivation, depression, dyspnea, and panting. Initially, animals have a clear nasal discharge; later, the discharge becomes mucopurulent and dries to a crust around the nostrils. The muzzle, lips, and ears are hyperemic, and the lips and tongue may be very swollen. The tongue is occasionally cyanotic and protrudes from the mouth. The head and ears may also be edematous. Erosions and ulcerations are often found in the mouth; these lesions may become extensive and the mucous membranes may become necrotic and slough. The coronary bands on the hooves are often hyperemic and the hooves painful; lameness is common and animals may slough their hooves if they are driven. Pregnant ewes may abort their fetuses, or give birth to "dummy" lambs. Additional clinical signs can include torticollis, vomiting, pneumonia, or conjunctivitis. The death rate varies with the strain of virus. 3 or 4 weeks after recovery, some surviving sheep can lose some or all of their wool. Recrudescence of clinical disease has been reported in sheep, possibly as the result of persistent infections in ovine T-lymphocytes.

Infections in cattle are usually subclinical; often, the only signs of disease are changes in the leukocyte count and a fluctuation in rectal temperature. Rarely, cattle have mild hyperemia, vesicles or ulcers in the mouth; hyperemia around the coronary band; hyperesthesia; or a vesicular and ulcerative dermatitis. The skin may develop thick folds, particularly in the cervical region. The external nares may contain erosions and a crusty exudate. Temporary sterility may be seen in bulls. Infected cows can give birth to calves with hydranencephaly or cerebral cysts. Cattle that have clinically apparent disease may develop severe breaks in the hooves several weeks after infection; such breaks are usually followed by foot rot. Infections in goats are usually subclinical, and similar to disease in cattle. Although many infections in wild ruminants are inapparent, severe disease can occur in some species. In pronghorn antelope and white-tailed deer, the most common symptoms are hemorrhages and sudden death.

BT is detectable by a variety of laboratory tests.

Part of controlling BT is to control the insects that spread the disease. There are a number of ways to do that. Disinfectants cannot prevent the virus from being transmitted between animals; however, where disinfection is warranted, sodium hypochlorite or 3 percent sodium hydroxide are effective. Insect control is important in limiting the spread of the disease; synthetic pyrethroids or organophosphates are effective against _Culicoides_.

Moving animals into barns in the evening can also reduce the risk of infection. Although the bluetongue virus does not infect equids, horses and stables should be considered in any control scheme, as _Culicoides_ can feed on horses, and manure piles are ideal breeding sites for these vectors.

And of course, as mentioned in the article, there are some vaccines available.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/bluetongue.pdf.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Brazil can be seen at http://healthmap.org/r/7ozU. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Bluetongue - Europe (03): Belgium, BTV-8, resolved, OIE 20130607.1759809
Bluetongue - Europe (02): France, BTV-8, BTV-1, resolved, OIE 20130523.1733915
Bluetongue - Europe: Italy (SD) ovine, spread 20130127.1517285
2012
--
Bluetongue - Europe (14): Greece (AI) st 4, OIE 20121207.1442302
Bluetongue - Europe (13): BTV-14, vaccine strain 20121205.1439689
Bluetongue - Europe (12): BTV-14, bovine, international trade, RFI 20121130.1431786
Bluetongue - Europe (11): Greece (AI) st 4, OIE 20121129.1430273
Bluetongue - Europe (10):Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, BTV-14, susp., RFI 20121127.1426885
Bluetongue - Europe (08): Russia, EU, BTV-14, RFI 20121123.1422112
Bluetongue - Middle East (03): Israel, ovine, BTV-2, BTV-4 20121115.1411420
.................................................rna/jw/tg/mj/mpp
</body>
