<header id=001197>
Published Date: 2006-12-26 19:00:00 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> BSE, bovine - Canada (AB)(06)
Archive Number: 20061227.3621
</header>
<body id=001197>
BSE, BOVINE - CANADA (ALBERTA)(06)
**********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail, a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 19 Dec 2006
From: Terry S. Singeltary Sr.
Source: CFIA [edited]
http://www.inspection.gc.ca/english/anima/heasan/disemala/bseesb/ab2006/8investe.shtml


Report on the Investigation of the 8th Case of Bovine Spongiform
Encephalopathy (BSE) in Canada
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background
---------
On 9 Aug 2006, a commercial beef cow on a farm in northern Alberta
died following a short history of neurological disease. The following
day a private practitioner sampled the cow under Canada's National
BSE Surveillance Program. Brain samples from this animal were sent to
the Alberta Agriculture, Food and Rural Development (AAFRD)
Laboratory, where they were screened for BSE using a Bio-Rad rapid
test. The preliminary test results received on 16 Aug 2006 did not
rule out BSE. In accordance with the prescribed testing protocol the
test was repeated on 17 Aug and produced a 2nd reaction.

Brain samples were then sent to the National Centre for Foreign
Animal Disease in Winnipeg where rapid screening tests were
performed, validating the work of the AAFRD, and BSE was confirmed by
the Scrapie Associated Fibril immunoblot and MAB monoclonal antibody
6H4 procedure on August 24, 2006. This method had been chosen because
of poor tissue quality (autolysis and freezing artefact) which
prevented a definitive identification of target areas for
immunohistochemistry. The carcass was secured from the farm,
transferred to the AAFRD laboratory and incinerated. No part of the
carcass entered the human food supply or animal feed chain.

The CFIA immediately initiated an epidemiological investigation based
on the most recent World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)
recommended BSE guidelines. Specifically, the CFIA investigated:

The birth cohort (all cattle born in the same herd as, and within 12
months of the birth of the BSE-positive animal); the feed cohort (all
cattle which, during their 1st year of life, were reared with the BSE
positive animal during its 1st year of life, and which investigation
showed consumed the same potentially contaminated feed during the
period); and feed to which the animal may have been exposed early in
its life. Animal Investigation. The positive cow was a Charolais
crossbred cow estimated as approximately 8 to 10 years of age at the
time of death by examination of her dentition. The herd on the index
premises had been assembled since 2001, including the purchase of the
index case. The positive cow was therefore purchased within the
previous 5 years and was not born at the index premises. The producer
reported the duration of illness was more than 1 week, during which
the animal exhibited neurological signs including ataxia and tremours
and became non-ambulatory (downer). The producer treated the animal
for milk fever, but despite treatment, she died. The following day a
private practitioner attended the premises to perform a post-mortem
examination which revealed the likely cause of death was peritonitis.
Because the animal met the inclusion criteria of Canada's National
BSE Surveillance Program, arrangements were made to forward
appropriate samples for laboratory evaluation.

The index farm was a commercial cow-calf operation. The index animal
was a purchased addition and there was no evidence that any members
of its birth or feed cohort were also present on the index premises.
The investigation initially focused on the determination of the farm
of origin (birth farm) of the positive cow. Because the positive cow
was not uniquely identified within the herd, and the farm's purchase
records did not conclusively document a specific transaction for the
acquisition of this particular cow, all purchases made by the
producer since the inception of the herd in 2001 were investigated.
It is possible that the cow was acquired before the introduction of
the 1st phase of regulations requiring official identification of
individual animals at the time of their movement (July 2001) or
before enforcement of the regulations was implemented. There would
have been no requirement for subsequent application of official
identification to the cow, as it had not been move!
d from its farm of residence since.

Of 56 possible sources of the farm of origin of the positive cow that
were investigated, 43 were definitively ruled out based on the
profile of the index cow (estimated age, color, breed-type, sex) and
the potential source farms' management practices (age of cows sold,
colour, breed-type, producers' application of man-made
identification). Information provided by the Livestock Investigation
Services in Alberta and the Canadian Cattle Identification Agency
(CCIA) was integral to the investigation. Because it was impossible
to distinguish among the 13 remaining possible sources of the index
cow, the animal was determined to be untraceable and no further
action could be undertaken with respect to the birth or feed cohort,
or the feed investigation.

The CFIA's previous experience with trace out investigations of birth
and feed cohorts would suggest that for a cow of this age (8 to 10
years), over 90 percent of its birth or feed cohort would have
previously left the cattle population due to attrition.

Feed Investigation
---------------
BSE feed investigations focus on the critical period of
susceptibility to BSE during the 1st year of life of positive animals
and encompass all potential avenues of direct exposure to prohibited
material as well as potential areas of cross-contamination. Because
the birth farm of this animal could not be definitively determined,
no feed investigation could be conducted. It has previously been
demonstrated that the BSE agent was present on limited occasions in
the Northern Alberta area during the period (1996-1998) spanning the
estimated 1st year of this animal's life and its maximum
susceptibility period. This period also coincides with the
introduction of regulations to prohibit the feeding of mammalian
protein to ruminants in Canada. The animal would have been born and
exposed before the feed ban came into effect or during the early
stages of implementation. At that time feed containing prohibited
material may have remained on farms and feed mills which were adapting to the !
new requirements.

The possibility that the exposure occurred on the index premises
where the positive animal lived since approximately 2001 was ruled
out based on the very limited susceptibility of older animals.

Since the confirmation of BSE in a native-born animal in May 2003,
Canada has significantly increased its targeted testing of cattle in
high-risk categories advocated by the OIE (including animals which
die on-farm). This effort is directed at determining the level of BSE
in Canada, while monitoring the effectiveness of the suite of
risk-mitigating measures in place. Canada's National BSE Surveillance
Program continues to demonstrate an extremely low level of BSE in
Canada, with 8 positive animals detected among over 128 000 targeted
tests conducted since 2004. Such detections demonstrate the
effectiveness and integrity of Canada's surveillance system; the
level of awareness existing at all levels of the animal and meat
production systems; the value of financial reimbursement provided for
sampling and carcass disposal; and the commitment of Canadian
producers and veterinarians to eliminating this disease. Canada's
surveillance program adheres to OIE guidelines.

Canada remains committed to the achievement of high standards of
animal and public health protection and food safety. As neither
science nor international standards are static, continuous assessment
and adjustments are undertaken to reflect new knowledge, technology
or approaches.

Amendments to the Health of Animals Regulations to enhance the
Canadian Cattle Identification system instituted in July 2001 were
made 14 Jun 2005. These amendments removed exemptions from the
requirement to tag animals. The requirement to identify was extended
to dead stock and the requirement to report information on identified
dead stock was expanded to include producers disposing of dead stock
on their own premises.

To facilitate traceability, tag distributors were required to report
producer information to the national database within 24 hours.
Individuals were required to report the correlated numbers when
applying a new tag to an animal that was already identified and it
was no longer permitted to replace an approved tag with another tag
for animals destined for the export market.

On 1 Sep 2006, the CCIA further enhanced the Canadian Cattle
Identification Program. CCIA's Policy now requires Radio-Frequency
Identification (RFID) tags on all cattle leaving their herds of
origin. This will facilitate Canada's tracing of movements and
electronic recording of identification at additional levels in the
animal production chain.

The safety of beef produced in Canada is assured by public health
measures enacted in 2003, following the 1st detection of BSE in a
native-born animal in Canada. The removal of Specified Risk Materials
(SRM), those tissues which have been demonstrated to have the
potential to harbor BSE infectivity, from all animals slaughtered for
human consumption is the most effective single measure to protect
consumers in Canada and importing countries from exposure to BSE
infectivity in meat products.

International experts agreed that the proactive implementation of the
1997 mammalian to ruminant feed ban in Canada was a critically
important factor in limiting the spread and preventing the
amplification of BSE in the feed system. In independent reviews in
2005 the United States Department of Agriculture and the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency concluded that the ban, as designed,
implemented and currently applied, provides an effective barrier that
is contributing to reducing the risk of BSE.

Regulations to enhance Canada's feed ban were announced on 26 Jun
2006. The most important change will require the removal of specified
risk material from all animal feeds, pet food and fertilizer. The
enhancement will significantly accelerate progress toward eradicating
BSE from the national cattle herd by preventing more than 99 percent
of potential BSE infectivity from entering the Canadian feed system
and eliminating opportunities for cross-contamination within the
complex system of production, transportation and storage of animal
feeds. For further information, please see the fact sheet, "Canada's
Enhanced Feed Ban", at
http://www.inspection.gc.ca/english/anima/feebet/rumin/enhrene.shtml

Footnote
--------
Based on revisions to the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy Chapter of
the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code (2006), the CFIA amended its
policy regarding the destruction of calves of BSE positive cows born
within 24 months of the development of clinical signs. Since August
2006, CFIA no longer requires their destruction for disease control.
However, the CFIA will continue to trace calves born to a positive
female in respect of current export certification requirements
requested by some importing countries.

--
Terry S. Singeltary Sr.
See Also
BSE, bovine - Canada (AB)(05) 20060825.2413
BSE, bovine - Canada (AB)(04) 20060823.2384
BSE, bovine - Canada (AB)(03) 20060714.1937
BSE, bovine - Canada (MB) 20060706.1855
BSE, bovine - Canada (BC)(03) 20060617.1680
BSE, bovine - Canada (BC)(02): herd tracing 20060430.1249
BSE, bovine - Canada (BC) 20060416.1134
BSE, bovine - Canada (AB)(02) 20060220.0549
BSE, bovine - Canada (AB) 20060123.0219
.....................................tg/pg/jw
</body>
