<header id=055241>
Published Date: 2019-09-07 07:57:18 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Vaping-related illness - USA: oil, contaminant suspected, fatal
Archive Number: 20190907.6661874
</header>
<body id=055241>
VAPING-RELATED ILLNESS - USA: OIL, CONTAMINANT SUSPECTED, FATAL
***************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 5 Sep 2019
Source: Business Insider [edited]
https://www.businessinsider.com/why-is-vaping-dangerous-for-your-lungs-2019-9


There's something dangerous going on in the lungs of hundreds of vapers, and their vape juice might be to blame. At least 215 cases of serious vaping-related lung issues have been reported to the CDC this summer [2019] alone across 25 US states.

So far, the lung problems have led to several medically induced comas, and at least one death was reported in Illinois in August [2019]. Another fatality is now being investigated in Oregon.

"We don't yet know the exact cause of these illnesses -- whether they're caused by contaminants, ingredients in the liquid or something else, such as the device itself," Dr. Ann Thomas, a public health physician with the Oregon Health Authority said Tuesday [3 Sep 2019] in a release.

No specific vaping brands have been called out, but many of the vaping illnesses have involved cannabinoid liquids like THC.

Experts aren't sure yet exactly why this is happening, but they have a hunch the illnesses may be nothing new. Because the vaping industry is largely unregulated, there are hundreds of different chemicals in vape liquids on the market, making it impossible for people to know whether the ones they're using are safe.

"We haven't been able to analyze e-liquid from these people, so we don't know what's in them," Professor Robert Tarran, who studies vaping at the University of North Carolina Marisco Lung Institute, told Insider.

Tarran says despite all the variation in what vapers inhale, there are 2 common ingredients in e-cigarettes: nicotine (dosed in varying concentrations) and propylene glycol/vegetable glycerin (PG-VG). "That kind of narrows it down," he said.

Nicotine isn't always in cannabis-derived e-liquids, suggesting vegetable oils and other liquid solvents -- which are used to deliver drugs in all kinds of vape pens, whether there is nicotine inside them or not -- could be playing a major role in the lung illnesses.

Federal and state health officials are now worried about the presence of vitamin E acetate in many sick patients' vapes, according to a report out from the Washington Post on Thursday [5 Sep 2019].

Vitamin E acetate (which is in oils including canola, soy, and corn) vaporizes at 363 deg F, well above temperatures at which some people vape. A New York state health spokeswoman told the Post the chemical was found in almost all cannabis samples from people in that state who've gotten sick in the past few weeks, suggesting it could be what's prompting some serious health issues.

It could be the case this vitamin oil, which is meant to harmlessly deliver drugs, is ending up in people's lungs as an invasive liquid. Then, the body mounts an immune response, prompting pneumonia. This idea aligns with what Tarran has found over roughly 5 years of his own research. "I think there's an emerging consensus the immune cells of the lung are a little bit upset by vaping," he said.

Professor Thomas Eissenberg at the Virginia Commonwealth University Center for the Study of Tobacco Products agrees vegetable oils found in many vape juices could be the major cause for concern. He points to at least 7 different case studies published over the past decade, which all suggest vape oil could be hurting people's lungs.

One is a 2018 BMJ case report of a 34-year-old British woman who'd been vaping for 3 years when she developed lipoid pneumonia and respiratory failure, while another from 2012 details how a 42-year-old woman was seen multiple times and prescribed "several courses of antibiotics" before doctors finally told her to stop using e-cigarettes. (Only then did her symptoms improve.)

"Vegetable glycerin is derived from vegetable oil, and to the extent the derivation process is not complete, vegetable oil could be getting into the liquid," Eissenberg told Insider. "If that's the case, we may be seeing not the last cluster of lipoid pneumonia, but rather the 1st."

If oil gets into people's lungs, where the body only expects to encounter air and oxygen, it can prompt inflammation, mounting a defensive immune response that leads to pneumonia.

"It makes me wonder whether, if we pulled a hundred electronic cigarette users off the streets and got some of their lung fluid, how many of them would have lipids in their macrophages?" Eissenberg said. "They're not experiencing symptoms, but they have the underlying cause."

Tarran also worries the oily lung problems may be larger than what's been documented this summer [2019] by the CDC and FDA. But he cautions that there could be other reasons for the pneumonia cases, including "rogue chemicals" or nicotine.

"I suspect ... it's been happening all along and people are just starting to notice it," he said. "You just kind of realize, as vaping continues to grow in popularity, how little we know."

Tarran's most recent study of vapers, published last month [August 2019] in the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, suggests vaping may be nearly as harmful as smoking, when it comes to overall lung health and long-term lung disease risk.

"People who vape, who've never smoked, they're part of a whole new kind of social experiment," he said. "Do they really want to be the guinea pigs?"

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 6 Sep 2019
Source: The Washington Post [edited]
https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2019/09/05/contaminant-found-vaping-products-linked-deadly-lung-illnesses-state-federal-labs-show/?noredirect=on


State and federal health officials investigating mysterious lung illnesses linked to vaping have found the same chemical in samples of marijuana products used by people sickened in different parts of the country and who used different brands of products in recent weeks.

The chemical is an oil derived from vitamin E. Investigators at the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) found the oil in cannabis products in samples collected from patients who fell ill across the USA. FDA officials shared that information with state health officials during a telephone briefing this week, according to several officials who took part in the call.

That same chemical was also found in nearly all cannabis samples from patients who fell ill in New York in recent weeks, a state health department spokeswoman said. While this is the 1st common element found in samples from across the country, health officials said it is too early to know whether this is causing the injuries.

Vitamin E is found naturally in certain foods, such as canola oil, olive oil and almonds. The oil derived from the vitamin, known as vitamin E acetate, is commonly available as a nutritional supplement and is used in topical skin treatments. It is not known to cause harm when ingested as a vitamin supplement or applied to the skin. Its name sounds harmless, experts said, but its molecular structure could make it hazardous when inhaled. Its oil-like properties could be associated with the kinds of respiratory symptoms many patients have reported: cough, shortness of breath and chest pain, officials said.

"We knew from earlier testing by New York they had found vitamin E acetate, but to have FDA talk about it from their overall testing plan, that was the most remarkable thing we heard," said one official who listened to the briefing but was not authorized to speak publicly.

The FDA also told state officials Wednesday [4 Sep 2019] its lab tests found nothing unusual in nicotine products having been collected from sick patients, according to another person who took part in the call.

The investigation has been particularly challenging for health authorities. "We don't know what we're looking for," an official at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which is leading the investigation, said last week.

Officials are trying to come up with a consistent definition of the illness and a standardized system for collecting information from the states. Unlike certain infectious diseases, such as measles, which are required to be reported to federal authorities, states are not required to report possible cases of vaping-related illnesses to the CDC, which is leading the investigation.

State health departments are reporting new cases weekly. As of 27 Aug 2019, there were 215 possible cases reported by 25 states. Additional reports of lung illnesses are under investigation, according to CDC officials.

On Wednesday [4 Sep 2019], Oregon health authorities said a middle-aged adult who died in late July [2019] of a severe respiratory illness had used an e-cigarette containing marijuana oil purchased from a legal dispensary. It's the 2nd death linked to vaping nationwide and the 1st to be linked to a product bought at a store. Illinois officials reported the 1st death last week [25-31 Aug 2019]. They did not specify what kind of product was used in that case.

State and federal health authorities have said they are focusing on the role of contaminants or counterfeit substances as a likely cause of vaping-related lung illnesses. Many patients have told officials and clinicians that they bought cannabis products off the street. Many of those who have fallen ill say they have vaped products containing marijuana, but others said they used traditional nicotine e-cigarettes. Many report using both. Authorities said they are not ruling out adulterants in nicotine vaping products.

Although the discovery of a common chemical in lab tests from the FDA and New York's highly regarded Wadsworth Center lab offers a potential lead, officials cautioned they are a long way from understanding what exactly is making so many people sick.

An FDA spokesperson said the agency is "looking into potential leads regarding any particular constituent or compound that may be at issue." The FDA is analyzing samples for a broad range of chemicals, including nicotine, THC, other cannabinoids, "cutting agents" being used to dilute liquids, other additives, pesticides, opioids, poisons and toxins. THC is the component in marijuana that makes users high.

"The number of samples received continues to increase and we now have over 100 samples for testing," FDA spokesman Michael Felberbaum said Thursday [5 Sep 2019].

"No one substance, including Vitamin E acetate, has been identified in all of the samples tested," he added. "Importantly, identifying any compounds present in the samples will be one piece of the puzzle but will not necessarily answer questions about causality."

Not all the samples are suitable for testing. The FDA analyzed 12 viable nicotine samples and 18 viable THC products, state officials said. Vitamin E acetate was found in 10 of the 18 THC products.

"This was the only thing that seemed to show up in 10 of the 18 cannabis products," said one state official who took part in the call.

On Friday [6 Sep 2019], the FDA said most of the THC samples tested contained "significant amounts of vitamin E acetate." Although the FDA does not have enough data to conclude that vitamin E acetate is the cause of the lung injury, the agency said, "it is prudent to avoid inhaling this substance."

The federal lab results seem to confirm findings from New York State. Late last week, its lab found "very high levels of vitamin E acetate in nearly all" its cannabis samples tested. More than a dozen samples were tested, a health department spokeswoman said Thursday [5 Sep 2019]. At least one vape product containing vitamin E acetate has been linked to each patient who submitted a product for testing, the department said.

"Vitamin E acetate is not an approved additive for New York State Medical Marijuana Program-authorized vape samples and was not seen in the nicotine-based products tested. As a result, vitamin E acetate is now a key focus" of New York's investigation, New York State Health Commissioner Howard Zucker said in a statement Thursday [5 Sep 2019].

As of Thursday, New York had received 34 reports from doctors of severe pulmonary illness among patients who ranged in age from 15 to 46 who were using at least one cannabis-containing vape product before becoming sick. All patients reported recent use of various vape products, officials said. Many are suspected to be counterfeits of recreational cannabis-containing vape products available in other states.

The 2nd report of a death has emphasized the danger of this lung disease. "It was surprising that the patient suddenly appeared without any other underlying health conditions and became ill enough to die from this syndrome," said Ann Thomas, a physician with the Oregon Health Authority.

Vaping refers to the increasingly popular practice of inhaling vapor from an e-cigarette device, which frequently involves heating a liquid possibly containing nicotine, marijuana or other drugs.

Vitamin E acetate is basically grease, said Michelle Francl, a chemistry professor at Bryn Mawr College. Its molecular structure means that "you have to heat it up pretty hot" for it to vaporize. Its boiling point is 363 deg F, which is well above the 212 deg F boiling point for water.

Once the oil is heated hot enough to vaporize, it can potentially decompose, and "now you're breathing in who-knows-what," Francl said. When that vapor cools down in the lungs, it returns to its original state at that temperature and pressure, she said, which means "it has now coated the inside of your lungs with oil," she said.

In Utah, clinicians have treated several patients with acute lung injuries who were diagnosed with a rare condition known as lipoid pneumonia, with symptoms including chest pain and difficulty breathing. Those patients had abnormal immune cells filled with lipids, doctors said.

Unlike the human digestive tract, which can break down and get rid of foreign substances, the lungs aren't designed to handle anything except gases, experts said.

Laura Crotty Alexander, a lung inflammation and e-cigarette researcher at the University of California at San Diego's School of Medicine, said it's not clear whether the chemical itself or its byproducts could be toxic. "We haven't looked at the toxicity of vitamin E in the lungs," she said. "The lungs are designed to exchange gas molecules; they're not designed to be exposed to other chemicals."

When the lung cells die, it often provokes an inflammatory response, and "other cells need to come in and clean up the cell debris," Alexander said. But the lungs are very delicate. When extra cells enter, "they get in the way of gas exchange," she said. That makes it more difficult for oxygen to get into a person's bloodstream. The inflammation can cause liquid to accumulate in the lungs, making it difficult for someone to breathe, she said.

[Byline: Lena H. Sun]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Fri 6 Sep 2019
Source: Oregon Live [edited]
https://www.oregonlive.com/marijuana/2019/09/vaping-death-and-outbreak-of-severe-lung-disease-linked-to-marijuana-oil-in-e-cigarettes-what-we-know.html


Two Oregon marijuana shops are in health officials' crosshairs as the state works to figure out why a middle-age person got a severe lung disease and died. Oregon officials are looking at 2 marijuana shops visited by a severe lung illness victim as the potential source of e-cigarette liquid.

Health experts and investigators nationwide are scrambling to understand what's causing an outbreak of severe lung disease linked to e-cigarettes and the deaths of at least 2 people, including a middle-age Oregon resident who had vaped legal marijuana oil.

The oil in the Oregon case contained THC, the psychoactive chemical in cannabis giving consumers a high, and the person bought it at a dispensary, the Oregon Health Authority said. Officials didn't identify the dispensary or the exact product.

Here's what we know so far on the fast-moving developments:

The disease: The lung disease linked to vaping is different from just about anything Oregon Health Authority's chief investigator, Ann Thomas, said she's encountered before. In a matter of days or a few weeks, it can start strangling an otherwise healthy person from the inside. In the most extreme cases, patients must go on ventilators to breathe, Thomas said.

The illness is so new health officials have barely had time to identify the precise cause. At least 215 people in 25 states have come down with the lung illness, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

What's an e-cigarette: E-cigarettes come in all sorts of shapes and sizes but work on the same principle: A heating element turns a liquid into a vapor, which, when inhaled, delivers nicotine or THC to the person using it. In addition to the nicotine or THC, the liquids carry flavorings and chemicals that help create the vapor.

There are 3 kinds of e-cigarettes, according to federal health officials.

The biggest and bulkiest kind have tanks holding the vape liquid. Users buy whatever mixes and flavors they want in little bottles, then fill up the tanks as necessary. These e-cigarettes allow users to adjust the intensity of the vapor they inhale.

A simpler kind of e-cigarette comes with replaceable cartridges coming in a variety of flavors. The company Juul has made nicotine e-cigarettes of this type extremely popular among nicotine users. Users can see how much liquid is left in a cartridge and replace it when it's done. A little light changes from green to yellow to red to indicate if the e-cigarette battery needs to be recharged.

Finally, users can also buy disposable e-cigarettes. They work on the same fundamental principle as other vaping devices but can't be refilled.

If you vape: Federal health officials warn against buying products off the streets or modifying e-cigarettes and cartridges. Whatever the outcome of the current investigation, young people, pregnant women and those who don't currently use tobacco products shouldn't start to vape, the CDC said last week [25-31 Aug 2019]. Those who vape should watch for symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath and chest pain, the agency said.

The Oregon death and its significance: It is the 1st in the state and the 2nd in the country.

The case is significant because it's been linked to at least one legal marijuana retail store. Experts have theorized that bootleg cannabis products may be causing the illnesses as opposed to the kinds of products that are tested and vetted by state agencies.

The Oregon Health Authority is leading the investigation into the death and has homed in on stores where the victim shopped before falling ill. The agency is still trying to get a hold of the product the person bought, an agency spokesman said.

The other death, announced a few weeks ago, was in Illinois. Officials didn't disclose details surrounding the death, saying only that the person was an adult and had vaped before dying from a severe respiratory illness.

Oils: The Washington Post reported Thursday [5 Sep 2019] that federal officials suspect that oil derived from Vitamin E could be one culprit. The chemical isn't inherently dangerous and can be found in skin treatments and supplements. But inhaling the oil form of Vitamin E could cause chest pain, shortness of breath and coughing, the Post reported.

The oil form, called Vitamin E acetate, needs to be heated at a very high temperature to turn into a vapor, the Post wrote. Once inside the lungs, it cools down and returns to its original state, a chemistry professor told the Post, coating the inside of the lungs with oil. That, in turn, can cause an inflammation.

Oregon Health & Sciences University toxicologist Robert Hendrickson said that oil droplets can cause precisely the kind of reaction seen in the cases being investigated. While Hendrickson hasn't studied any of the cases, he said he was struck by the fact that so many involved cannabis products. Unlike nicotine, THC can be delivered only via oils when vaping. "There's a well-known effect," Hendrickson said. "If you inhale particles of oil, it can cause a lung reaction."

THC cartridges: A marijuana grower and processor in Oregon, meanwhile, suspects low-quality THC cartridges could be the source of the problem. Aviv Hadar, Oregrown Industries owner, said he and other Oregon producers can buy any kind of cartridges for their products they want. They're typically manufactured in China, he said, and don't have be tested for heavy metals. The cheaper a cartridge, the more likely it is to have dangerous metals like lead, he said.

What do vaping advocates say: American Vaping Association President Gregory Conley is frustrated by media coverage of the outbreak. All the health evidence he has seen points to THC products as the culprit in cases of severe lung illness, Conley said, and nicotine vape products are being unfairly maligned in the process.

[Byline: Fedor Zarkhin]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[What is known about all of these cases is that some substance, whether or not approved or legal, is in the vaping solution, and the specific entity or entities causing the problem has not been identified.

It seems the cause could be an oil, such as Vitamin E acetate oil, or illicit THC or something other oily substance. As one article pointed out, the lungs are a gas exchange organ, and oil of any amount could seriously affect the functioning of this vital organ. If the substance turns out to be an oil, such as Vitamin E acetate or some other oil, the character of the oil or oils can change at the high temperatures associated with vaping.

Regardless of the substances, people who vape should be aware of the danger, knowing it could lead to sudden acute death.

Furthermore, while the focus has been the vaping individual, what about the nearby person who is exposed to the vapors? What about the elderly, small children or those with other compromised lung function? What about a cancer patient who is being treated and encounters the vape vapors, much like 2nd-hand smoke? What could this unknown substance be doing to someone who is perhaps already compromised, but is only near a vaping individual?

It should be noted there may not be a lot of thorough information regarding the various flavors, colors, or other ingredients used in the vaping solutions with regard to the effect on the lungs. It seems most want to speak of the smoothness of the mixture or how it tastes or how enjoyable it is.

While the vaping industry may be on edge about this and feeling a bit maligned, it is hard to deny the deaths of individuals who were vaping. And vaping may turn out to be a coincidental association, or perhaps not. The industry, as the rest of us, will have to wait until the investigation unravels the mystery. If the cause is related to a component of the vape, then the industry should be prepared to regulate itself according to the finding.

We hope an answer is found sooner rather than later. - Mod.TG

For more on this rapidly developing story, please see the following articles, kindly forwarded by Mary Marshall <mjm2020@googlemail.com>:

Pneumonia cases linked to vaping are still rising. And federal officials don't know what's causing them. https://www.statnews.com/2019/09/06/vaping-cases-rising-dont-know-cause/?utm_source=STAT+Newsletters&utm_campaign=3f370fcd4e-Daily_Recap&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_8cab1d7961-3f370fcd4e-149684921

Lung illness tied to vaping has killed 5 people as new case reports surge. https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2019/09/06/lung-illness-tied-vaping-has-killed-third-person-may-be-new-worrisome-disease-officials-say/

Vaping Illnesses: Consumers can Help Protect Themselves by Avoiding Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-Containing Vaping Products. https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/vaping-illnesses-consumers-can-help-protect-themselves-avoiding-tetrahydrocannabinol-thc-containing?utm_campaign=CU_Vaping%20Illnesses_9%2F6%2F2019&utm_medium=email&utm_source=Eloqua

People Urged to Stop Vaping Following More Deaths, Hundreds of Illnesses. https://www.wsj.com/articles/authorities-investigating-450-vaping-illnesses-and-a-third-death-11567794441 - Mod. LXL

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6661874,106]

.................................................sb/tg/rd/lxl
</body>
