<header id=033896>
Published Date: 2012-03-22 05:20:43 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Botulism, equine - USA: (IN)
Archive Number: 20120322.1077287
</header>
<body id=033896>
BOTULISM, EQUINE - USA: (INDIANA)
*********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 20 Mar 2012
Source: Mansfield News Journal, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]
http://www.mansfieldnewsjournal.com/usatoday/article/38847377?odyssey=mod%7Cnewswell%7Ctext%7CFrontpage%7Cs


Botulism outbreak claims Reddington horse herd
----------------------------------------------
When VO of Reddington looks around her stables now, all is quiet. There are no sounds of horses snorting and whinnying, or the stamping of hooves. "All I have left are a lot of empty saddles," she said sadly.

In just a week's time, VO and her family lost all 5 of their horses to an outbreak of suspected botulism from an unknown food source. She has sent out samples of hay for testing and is awaiting the results -- not to lay blame, she says, but to make more people aware of the situation.

"It concerns me that other bales may be contaminated," she said. "I know that my farm is not the only farm that might be affected."

Dr. Bob Gillespie, a longtime veterinarian from Brownstown, said in his 45 years of practice, he has never had a case of botulism. He did not treat any of VO's horses.

"It's not very common," he said of the illness. He also said it's not usually transmitted through hay. "It's usually transported in the bones or meat of dead animals," he said. The outlook for a horse or any animal with botulism is not good, he added. "I would be surprised if they lived," he said. "They usually die."

The illness also has sickened 5 horses from Reins To Recovery Therapeutic Riding Center, which were being stabled at VJ Farms. VO and her family own the small horse farm located on the Jackson-Jennings County line in Reddington, northeast of Seymour.

Calli Johnson, executive director of Reins, said their horses are "still sick, and not out of the woods, by any means. We haven't lost any of them, and with veterinary care and the help of volunteers, we are taking good care of them," she said Monday [19 Mar 2012].

The therapy horses did not have as much exposure to the hay as the other horses and were moved early on. They also have received antitoxins that VO said are not available around [Reddington]. "It had to be shipped here," she said of the medicine.

The situation has caused Reins to temporarily suspend their lessons and delay their relocation from Jennings County to VJ Farms to a later date. "We are planning on being back in action soon," Johnson said.

VO and her family are excited about Reins' future move to their farm, but the sting of losing their own beloved horses will remain for some time, she said. "Never, never would I have ever envisioned something like this happening," she said. "We're just taking a day at a time."

The last 2 of the herd, a loveable pony, appropriately named Pony, and a half-Arabian named Sugar, died Saturday [17 Mar 2012]. "It's like my whole world came crashing down," she said of the horses' deaths. "I have had horses since I was a teenager."

The 5 included her husband's Peruvian Paso, a rare breed, which he had owned since 1991. "He got her when she was just a foal, trained her, and retired her a year and a half ago," she said of the horse named Muscles for her strength and tendency to "muscle her way around when she was a yearling." Muscles died 13 Mar 2012.

Another belonged to her 18-year-old daughter. "She held her horse's head in her lap until it passed away," Oliphant said. Also lost was what she called her "retirement pony" -- a Shetland named Dixie. "When I quit work, I was going to get a cart and hitch her up to it and just ride around," she said. "That dream is gone now."

She said the illness affects the horses' muscles and urged farmers to be on the lookout for similar symptoms in their herds. "They couldn't eat, chew. They couldn't drink or swallow, so they literally starved themselves to death," she said.

However, she added, the botulism does not affect cattle. "Because of their stomachs, it wouldn't affect them," she said. "But it would affect smaller livestock like goats and sheep."

The family also has had to deal with concerned people who were not aware of the situation. "We've had the sheriff's department here because someone has called them saying we had dead horses laying in the field," she said. "We had to wait to get the equipment in to bury them. It really hurt that we were accused of dragging the horses out there and leaving them," she added. "But we do understand people's concerns. We just wish they would have stopped and asked us what was going on."

To rectify the situation, she said they placed a sign out by the road that said there was a botulism outbreak.

Reins To Recovery is not letting the setback deter its commitment to its clients and its continued growth.

"We are in the middle of a building campaign that is going to allow us to build an addition of a tack room and a viewing area and sitting room for our clients," Johnson said. "We are very excited because this campaign is going to be huge. It's going to help us grow."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Horses are the most sensitive of the domesticated animals to botulism. Botulism is a disease that occurs when toxins produced by the bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_ enter the horse's body causing weakness which may progress to paralysis. The botulism bacterium is a spore-forming, anaerobic bacteria (grows in the absence of oxygen) which is found worldwide. It is commonly present in soil and in decaying animal carcasses.

When the bacterium grows, it produces one or more toxins. These toxins block the connection between the nerves and muscles. As a result, affected horses often exhibit signs varying from muscle weakness to paralysis.

Affected horses
- usually have muscle tremors,
- may be so weak that they cannot stand up,
- lose control of their tongue so it may hang from their mouth,
- can't eat and they drool because they can't swallow,
- may walk stiffly with a short stride or they may be weak and stumble. Their tail may lose its tone.

Eventually they die because their respiratory muscles become paralyzed or because they get other health problems from being down. These clinical signs can occur within several hours or up to 7-10 days post ingestion of the contaminated feed.

Horses can get botulism in any of 3 ways. In foals up to 8 months of age, botulism can occur if the bacterium grows in the foal's intestines. Foals that are growing well and are being fed grain are most likely to get into trouble. These foals are called "shaker foals" because the muscle weakness from the toxin makes them tremble.

Occasionally a wound can become infected with the bacterium and cause botulism in adults. Fortunately, this is rare. Far more commonly, botulism occurs when horses eat feed or water which contains preformed toxin. Clostridia grow on substrates (food sources) that are above a pH of 4.5 and are in an anaerobic (non oxygen) environment. Here they produce toxins.

Improperly preserved haylage can be an ideal environment for clostridial growth. Water and feed can also be contaminated with the carcass of a dead animal. When several horses develop botulism, toxin in feed or water is usually the reason.

Seven distinct serotypes of botulinum toxin have been isolated. They are designated types A through G. There appears to be a geographical distribution of the various serotypes as well as association with different feed sources. The following indicates the serotype and the typical species involved in a poisoning:
- types A, B, and C have been seen in cattle;
- type A botulinum toxin has been incriminated in several outbreaks in horses in the northwestern United States (Washington, Idaho, Montana, Oregon);
- type B predominates and is referred to as forage botulism because of its association with contaminated forage;
- type C is referred to as carrion botulism because of the association with the ingestion of feed containing a decomposing carcass (such as, rodent, cat, dog, bird) or from eating the bones of dead animals;
- types C and D are found in poultry and poultry manures, mink, and wild ducks;
- type E occurs in fish or in association with the consumption of fish products.

The clinical signs of botulism are similar to other causes of central nervous signs, including rabies, the equine viral encephalitis diseases such as Eastern, Western, or West Nile encephalitis, and the nervous form of equine viral rhinopneumonitis. Botulism is diagnosed by eliminating other causes of central nervous disease and associating a point source such as the feeding of haylage.

Rarely is it possible to detect botulinum toxin in the serum of affected animals or in suspect feed. The mouse toxin assay is the gold standard for toxin detection and typing. However, it may take up to 4 days to complete the test. Although a positive test confirms the presence of the toxin, a negative test does not mean that an animal is not affected by the disease.

Botulism is difficult to treat. There is a polyvalent (A-E) anti-toxin available from Dr Bob Whitlock at New Bolton Center, University of Pennsylvania. However, it costs about USD 3000 per horse. Other plasma products (Veterinary Dynamics) contain type B antitoxin. The University of Guelph and some other teaching hospitals maintain a supply of antitoxin. The antitoxin is most beneficial if used when animals are first seen to be sick. With supportive care, horses can recover but, if they are exposed to a large amount of toxin, most will die despite treatment.

An inactivated toxoid is used to vaccinate against botulism. A toxoid is a toxin which has been treated to destroy its toxicity but retains its ability to generate an immune response when injected into an animal. Neogen Biologics, Michigan, USA, manufactures Bot Tox-B. It is available in Canada from some suppliers. It protects against type B only. A 3-initial-dose vaccination program is recommended followed by a single annual vaccination.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/livestock/horses/facts/info_botulism.htm.

Indiana may be found on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/1*BZ. - Mod.TG]
See Also
2011
----
Undiagnosed deaths, equine - Australia (03): (QL) botulism susp 20111013.3062
2010
----
Botulism, equine - USA: (TN) 20100519.1650
Botulism, equine, bovine - USA (02): (WI), RFI 20100408.1129
Botulism, equine, bovine - USA: (WI) 20100404.1084
.................................................sb/tg/mj/lm
</body>
