<header id=055192>
Published Date: 2012-04-30 06:40:14 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Botulism, equine - USA (02): (ME)
Archive Number: 20120430.1117973
</header>
<body id=055192>
BOTULISM, EQUINE - USA (02): (MAINE)
************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 28 Apr 2012
Source: Kennnebec Journal, MaineToday [edited]
http://www.kjonline.com/news/investigator-sickened-horses-difficult-to-treat_2012-04-29.html


The state veterinarian studying the deaths of 23 animals at a Gorham farm says botulism can kill quickly.

Maine's state veterinarian has been working to find the source of a rare botulism outbreak that is believed to have killed 23 horses at the Whistlin' Willows Farm in Gorham in the past month.

Almost 2 dozen horses died in an outbreak of botulism this month [April 2012] at Whistlin' Willows Farm on Nonesuch Road in Gorham. Dr. Donald Hoenig, the state veterinarian, says there are no signs that the animals were cared for improperly.

Some of the farm's horses recovered from the outbreak's effects, while another 40 to 45 animals never became sick, officials said.

Part of the problem during an outbreak, said Dr. Donald Hoenig, is that once a horse exhibits signs of botulism poisoning, there is little veterinarians can do to treat the animal.

Owners of the 175-acre farm -- William and Anne Kozloff, according to the Whistlin' Willows website -- did not respond Saturday [28 Apr 2012] to telephone calls or emails.

State inspectors believe the powerful and fast-acting neurotoxin responsible for the outbreak developed in bales of silage, which is packaged in white plastic while the grass is still moist, unlike hay, which is dried.

Hoenig said a horse can die from botulism within hours of ingestion. Flushing the animal with fluids is the standard treatment, but that is often difficult because the horse's facial muscles are typically paralyzed, and it is impossible for it to swallow. "It is just an awful situation," said Hoenig.

He said that antitoxins are available, but they are not a great solution since the veterinarian has to know which one of 8 different strains of botulism caused the poisoning. The antidote can cost USD 500-1000 per dose.

Hoenig said because botulism is so rare, Maine horse owners do not commonly vaccinate their animals against it. Hoenig does not recommend feeding silage to unvaccinated horses.

Hoenig said he hopes to send samples of the silage to Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y. this week to confirm the presence of botulism. He said he would then decide what steps to take to prevent more poisonings. The person who provided the silage to Whistlin' Willows Farm, whom Hoenig declined to identify, is working with state officials to help identify the source.

Hoenig warned horse owners against feeding moldy hay to their animals.

Some local horse owners said that while the poisonings were tragic, they were not worried about the welfare of their own animals. Jo Hight, president of the Maine Horse Association, said silage is difficult for horses to digest and generally horse owners avoid it. "There is no panic that this would spread," she said.

The poisonings started on 7 Apr 2012 and continued through 17 Apr 2012. Several horses recovered from the effects, probably because they ingested smaller amounts of the bacteria [that produce the toxin], said Hoenig. Another 40 to 45 horses at the farm were not sickened. Hoenig said there were no signs that the animals were cared for improperly. There have been no other cases of suspected botulism poisonings in horses in Maine.

State officials are working with the Gorham farm owners to keep the carcasses of the animals, buried 8 feet deep on the farm, from contaminating the water table. Hoenig said the concern is not about the spread of botulism, which research shows does not spread through water, but about other contaminants.

[Byline: Beth Quimby <bquimby@mainetoday.com>]

--
Communicated by:
Kunihiko Iizuka <edcvfr3464@yahoo.co.jp>

[Horses are the most sensitive of the domesticated animals to botulism. Botulism is a disease that occurs when toxins produced by the bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_ enter the horse's body causing weakness which may progress to paralysis. The botulism bacterium is a spore-forming, anaerobic bacteria (grows in the absence of oxygen) which is found worldwide. It is commonly present in soil and in decaying animal carcasses.

When the bacterium grows, it produces one or more toxins. These toxins block the connection between the nerves and muscles. As a result, affected horses often exhibit signs varying from muscle weakness to paralysis.

Affected horses
- usually have muscle tremors,
- may be so weak that they cannot stand up,
- lose control of their tongue so it may hang from their mouth,
- can't eat, and they drool because they can't swallow,
- may walk stiffly with a short stride, or they may be weak and stumble. Their tail may lose its tone.

Eventually, they die because their respiratory muscles become paralyzed or because they get other health problems from being down. These clinical signs can occur within several hours or up to 7-10 days post ingestion of the contaminated feed.

Horses can get botulism in any of 3 ways. In foals up to 8 months of age, botulism can occur if the bacterium grows in the foal's intestines. Foals that are growing well and are being fed grain are most likely to get into trouble. These foals are called "shaker foals," because the muscle weakness from the toxin makes them tremble.

Occasionally, a wound can become infected with the bacterium and cause botulism in adults. Fortunately, this is rare. Far more commonly, botulism occurs when horses eat feed or water which contains preformed toxin. Clostridia grow on substrates (food sources) that are above a pH of 4.5 and are in an anaerobic (non oxygen) environment, where they produce toxins.

Improperly preserved hay can be an ideal environment for clostridial growth. Water and feed can also be contaminated with the carcass of a dead animal. When several horses develop botulism, toxin in feed or water is usually the reason.

Seven distinct serotypes of botulinum toxin have been isolated. They are designated types A through G. There appears to be a geographical distribution of the various serotypes as well as association with different feed sources. The following indicates the serotype and the typical species involved in a poisoning:
- types A, B, and C have been seen in cattle;
- type A botulinum toxin has been incriminated in several outbreaks in horses in the northwestern United States (Washington, Idaho, Montana, Oregon);
- type B predominates and is referred to as forage botulism because of its association with contaminated forage;
- type C is referred to as carrion botulism because of the association with the ingestion of feed containing a decomposing carcass (such as, rodent, cat, dog, bird) or from eating the bones of dead animals;
- types C and D are found in poultry and poultry manures, mink, and wild ducks;
- type E occurs in fish or in association with the consumption of fish products.

The clinical signs of botulism are similar to other causes of central nervous signs, including rabies, the equine viral encephalitis diseases such as eastern, western, or West Nile encephalitis, and the nervous form of equine viral rhinopneumonitis. Botulism is diagnosed by eliminating other causes of central nervous disease and associating a point source such as the feeding of haylage.

Rarely, is it possible to detect botulinum toxin in the serum of affected animals or in suspect feed. The mouse toxin assay is the gold standard for toxin detection and typing. However, it may take up to 4 days to complete the test. Although a positive test confirms the presence of the toxin, a negative test does not mean that an animal is not affected by the disease.

Botulism is difficult to treat. There is a polyvalent (A-E) anti-toxin available from Dr Bob Whitlock at New Bolton Center, University of Pennsylvania. However, it costs about USD 3000 per horse. Other plasma products (Veterinary Dynamics) contain type B antitoxin. The University of Guelph and some other teaching hospitals maintain a supply of antitoxin. The antitoxin is most beneficial if used when animals are 1st seen to be sick. With supportive care, horses can recover but, if they are exposed to a large amount of toxin, most will die despite treatment.

An inactivated toxoid is used to vaccinate against botulism. A toxoid is a toxin which has been treated to destroy its toxicity but retains its ability to generate an immune response when injected into an animal. Neogen Biologics, Michigan, USA, manufactures Bot Tox-B. It is available in Canada from some suppliers. It protects against type B only. A 3-initial-dose vaccination program is recommended followed by a single annual vaccination.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/livestock/horses/facts/info_botulism.htm.

Maine can be found on the interactive HealthMap at: http://healthmap.org/r/1CfA - Mod.TG]
See Also
Botulism, equine - USA: (IN) 20120322.1077287
2010
----
Botulism, equine - USA: (TN) 20100519.1650
Botulism, equine, bovine - USA (02): (WI), RFI 20100408.1129
Botulism, equine, bovine - USA: (WI) 20100404.1084
2009
----
Botulism, equine - USA: (WY) 20090502.1651
.................................................tg/msp/lm
</body>
