<header id=021377>
Published Date: 2011-12-05 23:19:14 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis C - USA (03): treatment
Archive Number: 20111206.3540
</header>
<body id=021377>
HEPATITIS C - USA (03): TREATMENT
*********************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 2 Dec 2011
Source: Montefiore Medical Center, Press release [abridged & edited]
http://www.manufacturingdigital.com/press_releases/babyboomers-most-at-risk-for-hepatitis-c-virus


Experts at the Montefiore Medical Center urge the general public to be
tested for hepatitis C virus [infection], especially "baby boomers"
[that is, adults born between 1946-1964], who could be most at risk
for this disease.

Baby boomers are more likely to have been exposed to dangerous risk
factors decades ago, such as sharing a drug needle, being tattooed or
pierced with unsterilized tools, or receiving a tainted [unscreened]
blood transfusion. The disease [initial infection] often has no
symptoms and, if untreated, can lead to chronic infection that can
scar the liver, cause liver failure or cancer and potentially
[require] liver transplantation.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the commonest chronic bloodborne infection
in the United States, with 35 000 to 185 000 new cases diagnosed per
year. Worldwide, 180 million people are chronically infected with
hepatitis C [virus], with an estimated 3-4 million new cases reported
each year. The disease particularly affects minorities [in the USA]:
Hispanics, Asian-Americans, and African-Americans.

"This disease has grown to epidemic proportions, with 350 000 people
around the world dying from hepatitis C related liver disease," said
Milan Kinkhabwala, MD, chief of the Division of Transplantation at the
Montefiore Einstein Center for Transplantation. "But it is called the
'silent killer' because many people don't even know they have it. This
condition can be asymptomatic for decades and then present itself when
it has already severely damaged the liver."

Individuals at risk can get a simple blood test to detect the virus
before chronic infection leads to permanent liver damage.

"This is a revolutionary time in the treatment of the disease, and
there is more hope than ever before," said Dr Kinkhabwala. "The blood
test is essential to detecting hepatitis C, because now there are ways
to treat the condition and even reverse damage to the liver."

Two new anti-viral oral medications, boceprevir and teleprevir,
received approval from the Food and Drug Administration in May 2011.
Both drugs work by blocking an enzyme that helps the virus reproduce.
The drugs are intended to improve on standard treatments using the
injected drug pegylated interferon alpha and the (oral) ribavavrin
[ribavirin, I think. - Mod.SH].

"So far, the new drugs have shown promise in clearing the virus from
the body and almost doubling the cure rate of the disease," said Allan
Wolkoff, MD, professor of medicine and of anatomy and structural
biology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University
and chief of the Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases at
Montefiore and Einstein. "Another key benefit is that they cut
treatment time in half, thus reducing the time the patient has to
endure the severe side effects, which include anemia, depression and
flu-like symptoms like fatigue, fever and headache."

When symptoms do occur after the disease has progressed, they're
generally mild and flu-like and may include fatigue, fever, nausea or
poor appetite, muscle and joint pain, bruising, abdominal pain,
jaundice and itching. At that point, chronic infection can lead to
scarring of the liver (fibrosis) and then advanced scarring
(cirrhosis). Scarring of the liver makes it difficult for the liver to
function properly and can be devastating to the rest of the body,
often causing liver failure or liver cancer.

If the liver disease progresses too far and the medications are not
effective, then transplantation is the last resort. However, more than
16 000 people in the United States are currently waiting for a liver
donor, and in New York State, there are 1700 patients on the waiting
list.

Factors that have been reported to accelerate the rate of HCV disease
progression include age, gender (males have more rapid disease
progression than females), alcohol consumption, HIV coinfection (in
about 35 per cent of patients) and fatty liver (the presence of fat in
liver cells caused by obesity).

Unlike hepatitis B, there is no vaccine to prevent this disease. While
the symptoms are similar, distinct differences exist between the 2
viruses. Hepatitis B is primarily transmitted through sexual
intercourse and is less severe.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is classified into 11 major genotypes
(designated 1-11), many subtypes (designated a, b, c, etc), and about
100 different strains (numbered 1, 2, 3, etc) based on the genomic
sequence heterogeneity. The genes coding for the envelope E1 and E2
glycoproteins are the most variable. Amino acid changes may alter the
antigenic properties of the proteins, thus allowing the virus to
escape neutralizing antibodies.

Genotypes 1-3 have a worldwide distribution. Types 1a and 1b are the
commonest, accounting for about 60 per cent of global infections. They
predominate in Northern Europe and North America, and in Southern and
Eastern Europe and Japan, respectively. Type 2 is less frequently
represented than type 1. Type 3 is endemic in South East Asia and is
variably distributed in different countries. Genotype 4 is principally
found in the Middle East, Egypt, and central Africa. Type 5 is almost
exclusively found in South Africa, and genotypes 6-11 are distributed
in Asia.

The influence of viral genotype in the pathogenesis of liver disease
is still controversial. Environmental, genetic, and immunological
factors may contribute to the differences in disease progression, so
characteristic of HCV infection, observed among patients.

The determination of the infecting genotype is, however, important for
the prediction of response to antiviral treatment: genotype 1 is
generally associated with a poor response to interferon alone, whereas
genotypes 2 and 3 are associated with more favourable responses. The
current gold standard of therapy -- pegylated interferon-a in
combination with ribavirin -- significantly improves response for all
genotypes.

The combination of pegylated interferon (peginterferon) and ribavirin
has been the standard recommended treatment for HCV. The protease
inhibitors telaprevir and boceprevir were approved by the USFDA in May
2011 for the treatment of hepatitis C genotype 1 in combination with
peginterferon and ribavirin.

Three phase 3 trials are available for telaprevir, which provided data
that were the basis for FDA approval. Boceprevir demonstrated efficacy
and safety in 2 pivotal phase 3 trials. Both agents demonstrated
statistically significantly higher rates of virological response
compared with the standard of care involving peginterferons and
ribavirin. Telaprevir and boceprevir also demonstrated efficacy in the
treatment of patients who had previously failed dual therapy for
hepatitis C. Safety concerns for both agents include anemia, drug
interactions, skin rashes, and gastrointestinal adverse events.

Decision makers have many factors to consider in developing a strategy
around hepatitis C. Increased drug costs, patient management,
adherence, comparative safety and efficacy, and appropriate
utilization management controls are important issues. (See: Tungol A,
Rademacher K, Schafer JA. J Manag Care Pharm. 2011 Nov;17(9):685-94.).
- Mod.CP]
See Also
Hepatitis C - USA (02): sexual transmission 20110723.2212
Hepatitis C - USA: (WI), increase 20110705.2041
Hepatitis C - S. Korea: increase 20110621.1898
Hepatitis C, blood bank - India: (PB) 20110613.1805
Hepatitis C, physician-related cluster - Australia: (VI) 20110529.1647
Hepatitis C virus: canine homolog 20110526.1608
Hepatitis C - Canada: (QC) 20110510.1438
Hepatitis C - Ukraine (02) 20110302.0683
Hepatitis C - Ukraine 20110302.0679
.................................................sb/cp/msp/sh
</body>
