<header id=035990>
Published Date: 2018-04-07 17:08:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Drug abuse - USA (02): (IL ) synthetic cannabinoids, bleeding disorder
Archive Number: 20180407.5732582
</header>
<body id=035990>
DRUG ABUSE - USA (02): (ILLINOIS) SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS, BLEEDING DISORDER
***************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 6 Apr 2018 4:05 PM
Source: Chicago Tribune [edited]
http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-met-synthetic-marijuana-problems-history-20180406-story.html


Synthetic pot for years was sold under the guise of a cheaper alternative that allows users to dodge drug screenings.

And while there have been rashes of hospitalizations nationwide involving those who've ingested fake weed, experts say they've never seen the severe side effects -- internal bleeding in particular -- that have killed at least 2 and sickened dozens in the Chicago area and central Illinois in the past month [March 2018]. Investigators say while users have been smoking different brands of the synthetic marijuana, the common ingredient that may be leaving people ill is rat poison.

The problems are the result of a cat-and-mouse game playing out among government entities passing laws to ban synthetic pot and manufacturers tweaking their recipes to keep the drug on the market -- and money in their pockets, experts say.

The rat poison likely is to blame for the horrible side effects: internal bleeding, severe bloody noses and bleeding gums, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health. Officials and experts say this underscores the dangers of using synthetic cannabinoid products: Often the man-made drugs are manufactured and packaged under clandestine operations without being tested or otherwise scrutinized like legal medications that go through years of testing on animals and then people.

Typically, synthetic pot is created by spraying chemicals onto plant matter to make it look like real marijuana leaves. It is then packaged by manufacturers and, although bans are in place in Illinois and Chicago, it still makes its way to gas station and convenience store shelves. Officials say those sickened in Illinois were using different brands; still investigators are trying to trace whether it's possible the drug is from a single source.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was sending a team to help the Illinois Department of Public Health in its medical investigation into the outbreak. Ninety-five people, 2 of whom died, have been hospitalized since early March [2018] as officials continued to seek answers in the outbreak, according to the state department. Most of the sick patients are 25 to 34 years old.

Synthetic cannabinoid is a man-made mixture of hundreds of chemicals that affect the same brain cell receptors as the active ingredient in marijuana -- commonly known as tetrahydrocannabinol or THC -- that causes people to get a euphoric high. Often sold and branded as "K2" and "Spice," synthetic marijuana is typically sprayed on a plant material to be smoked, or it can be sold in a liquid form to be used in e-cigarettes or vaping devices, according to officials.

Many states, including Illinois, have passed laws to keep the substance off the shelves, but experts say manufacturers are constantly tweaking the formula to skirt laws that prohibit certain chemicals. In fewer than 10 years, the types of synthetic cannabinoid formulas jumped from 2 in 2009 to more than 80 in 2015, according to a report from the U.S. Department of Justice.

But once a law is created, manufacturers work to come up with a different formula in hopes of producing a drug that is legal in some cities and states, said Michael Baumann, a researcher who studies drug effects on the body for the National Institute on Drug Abuse. And manufacturers of the chemicals, often made without oversight overseas, consult scientific articles to see which compounds affect the same brain cell receptors as marijuana, he said.

"It's hard to know exactly what substances are on the street at any given time," Baumann said.

In Chicago, a city ordinance banning synthetic marijuana has been in place since 2011. The ordinance lists specific substances and then bans any other "non-prescription substance that has a chemical structure and/or pharmacological effect substantially similar to the active ingredient of marijuana, or tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)." There are also federal laws addressing synthetic drugs.

The Illinois Poison Center has continued to log cases of people becoming sick because of a synthetic cannabinoid product. There were 131 cases in 2015, 84 cases in 2016 and 51 in 2017, according to the agency. Since January, the agency has logged 101 cases statewide.

Chicago Ald. Edward Burke said he thinks the ordinance has been effective. In the wake of the outbreak, the city has made checks across the city at local retailers. But like any other illegal activity, Burke said there is a possibility of transactions happening from person to person.

"They'd be foolish to publicly advertise the products," Burke said.

Chemists have been studying and developing synthetic cannabinoids as part of scientific research into how it could be used for medical purposes, said Paul Prather, a professor at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences. Prather, who has been studying the therapeutic use of synthetic cannabinoid, said the formulas haven't been tested to determine side effects.

If you use "K2" or "Spice," "You are the guinea pig ingesting it into your body to see what happens," Prather said.

Prather said people use synthetic pot because it's relatively cheap and isn't detected on drug screenings, such as those sometimes required by employers.

In the recent outbreak, multiple brands of synthetic marijuana products have so far been linked to those who became sick, the state department of health said. It's possible that the tainted synthetic cannabinoids ended up in different packaging under various brand names, according to the agency.

The Illinois outbreak is the 1st time Baumann and Prather have heard of severe bleeding as a side effect. Baumann said the outbreak is a sign of the lack of oversight in the manufacture and packaging of the substances.

Of the dozens who fell ill in Illinois after using synthetic pot, at least 9 tested positive for brodifacoum, more commonly known as rat poison, according to state officials.

Exposure to rat poison causes the body to block its natural use of vitamin K, which helps in the process of blood clotting, said Dr. Patrick Lank, a medical toxicologist who works at Northwestern Memorial Hospital. A person who has been exposed to this type of poison would have to take vitamin K for weeks to months to help manage their symptoms.

In Chicago, hospitalized users have tested positive for brodifacoum, said Dr. Allison Arwady, chief medical officer for the city's department of public health.

Most of the Chicago patients have had blood in their urine and stool. Others have complained of abdominal pain, a possible sign of internal bleeding, Arwady said. Patients started seeing symptoms within days of using synthetic marijuana, but city officials are logging information about their use of synthetic marijuana for the past three months as they seek answers to the outbreak.

Most of the patients across Chicago smoked the fake pot, while others vaped the drug or drank it in tea, she said. Some bought the substance at a convenience store, some got it from a friend while others bought it from someone who sells other drugs.

Health officials and law enforcement officials have been talking to the patients as they try to piece together the network distributing the products.

Authorities have already charged in federal court the owner and 2 workers of the King Mini Mart on Kedzie Ave. in Lawndale after an undercover officer bought synthetic marijuana sold under names like "Blue Giant," "Crazy Monkey" and "Matrix," according to a federal complaint. the owner (FM) of the mart, and employees JAJA and AKD each face a federal charge of conspiracy to distribute a controlled substance. The store sold USD 10 packets containing 4 to 5 grams of synthetic pot, according to court records.

Investigators began looking into the Lawndale convenience store after someone who had purchased synthetic pot there got sick. Two of the seized products were sent to a laboratory operated by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, which detected brodifacoum among the other chemicals, according to court records.

As the number of hospitalizations continued to increase, Arwady urged synthetic marijuana users to seek medical attention at the 1st signs of bleeding. Even minor bleeding can turn into something serious, she said.

"One person might get a very large dose, one person may get the small dose," Arwady said. "And all of that would affect the time that it would take to notice the symptoms. We know that the folks coming into care might be only a small percentage of people who have been exposed to it."

[Byline: Elvia Malagon]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 6 Apr 2018 07:37PM
Source: ABC7 Chicago [edited]
http://abc7chicago.com/health/chicago-man-dead-after-using-synthetic-marijuana/3308941/


A 22-year-old man from Chicago died in Oak Lawn after using so-called fake marijuana.

He is 1 of 2 confirmed deaths in Illinois from synthetic cannabis. The 2nd death was in central Illinois. A 3rd death may also be connected.

The Chicago man was treated for internal hemorrhaging at Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn.

He then left the hospital against his doctor's advice and was found dead soon after. The medical examiner said the man died on 28 Mar 2018 and "excessive internal bleeding" was discovered during the autopsy.

Authorities also said a 29-year-old woman from Chicago died after showing the same symptoms. Doctors are waiting for toxicology results to confirm.

At least 24 other patients in Cook County have presented similar symptoms since 7 Mar 2018.

Doctors have attributed the cases to a type rat poison found in the synthetic pot.

Cook County's Chief Medical Examiner Dr. Ponni Arunkumar said synthetic marijuana is dangerous enough. But when laced with this type of poison, it can be deadly.

"This is an anti-coagulant, it's powerful, it's used as rat poison, it stay in your body for a long time and that is what is creating this massive bleeding. Hospitals can treat these patients, so if they seek medical attention soon enough they can get treatment," said Dr. Arunkumar.

"Brodifacoum is a superwarfarin rat poison that has recently been identified in several cases of synthetic marijuana use in Illinois. It can cause severe, even fatal, bleeding. This poisoning is unique in that its effects can last weeks to months. Symptoms may range from unexplained bruising, bleeding from the nose or gums, blood in the urine or stools, coughing up or vomiting blood, to bleeding in the brain. Even without symptoms, the blood's ability to clot is severely impaired and risk of bleeding is high," said Dr. Jenny Lu, toxicologist and emergency medicine physician at Cook County Health & Hospitals System's Stroger Hospital in a statement.

Dr. Lu said most of her patients are unaware that the drug they've used in the past might now be laced with a dangerous poison.

The substance is often referred to as Spice, K2 or fake weed. It is a human-made, mind-altering chemical that is either sprayed on dried shredded plant material to be smoked or sold as a liquid to be vaporized and inhaled.

Public health officials say the product is not safe and if anyone has purchased it they shouldn't use it.

"Treatment includes a form of vitamin K, which can only be prescribed by a physician or given in the hospital and complete treatment of this poisoning involves taking high doses of this pharmaceutical grade vitamin K daily for weeks to months. Other interventions may be necessary depending on the severity of the poisoning. As bleeding can be life-threatening, it is important that people who have used synthetic marijuana seek medical attention at the first sign of poisoning so we can begin treatment right away," said Dr. Lu in a statement.

The Illinois Department of Public Health said patients have reported getting the drugs from convenience stores, dealers and friends.

The ingredients are banned in Illinois but manufacturers try to get around these laws by using different ingredients or using the label "not for human consumption."

Medical experts are urging people not to use the drugs. If they do, they should seek immediate medical treatment.

[Byline: Megan Hickey]
--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Fri 6 Apr 2018 02:01pm
Source: Chicago Sun Times [edited]
https://chicago.suntimes.com/cannabis/rat-poison-found-in-system-of-man-whose-death-was-linked-to-synthetic-cannabis/


A blood thinner used as a rat poison was found in the system of a man who died last week [week of Sun 25 Mar 2018] after experiencing severe bleeding linked to synthetic cannabis.

The 22-year-old man, who lived in the Southwest Side Clearing neighborhood, died at 3:40 p.m. 28 March 2018 at Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn, according to the Cook County Medical Examiner's Office.

He had been brought to the hospital from JC Miami Hotel, in Oak Lawn, after he was found having a seizure and vomiting earlier that day, according to a statement from Oak Lawn police. He had told family members that he smoked synthetic marijuana in the days leading up to his death.

"Excessive internal bleeding" was discovered during his autopsy but the exact cause of his death has not yet been determined pending further investigation, the medical examiner's office said. The anticoagulant brodifacoum was discovered during the investigation.

"Public health agencies are reporting patients who admitted to smoking synthetic cannabinoids are presenting to hospitals with severe bleeding and testing positive for brodifacoum," Dr. Ponni Arunkumar, Cook County's Chief Medical Examiner, said in a statement. "Brodifacoum is a highly lethal rodenticide and should not be consumed."

Brodifarcuom impairs blood clotting in humans and can cause fatal gastrointestinal or brain bleeding, officials said.

The owner of a West Side mini mart and two employees were charged earlier this week with selling synthetic cannabis laced with rat poison.

As of [Thu 5 Apr 2018], 89 people in Illinois have reported severe bleeding after using synthetic cannabinoids, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health. Two of those cases have been fatal.

The medical examiner's office said it was investigating a 2nd death that involved similar bleeding symptoms, but did not provide further details about the case. Toxicology testing was underway.

In the reported cases, people who used synthetic cannabinoids were hospitalized for symptoms such as coughing up blood, urinating blood, and bloody noses or gums, IDPH said.

The Illinois Department of Public Health tracks cases of bleeding from synthetic marijuana online.

Anyone with a reaction to synthetic cannabinoids should call 911, IDPH said.

[Byline: Luke Wilusz]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Brodifacoum is a long acting Vitamin K (a clotting factor) antagonist anticoaugulant which very lethal. It is a coumarin derivative, specifically a 4-hydroxycoumarin. It is a very widely used anticoagulant rodenticide. The good news is brodifacoum can be treated with vitamin K, and blood transfusions if caught early enough. However, there are rodenticides on the market today for which there is no treatment.

Brodifacoum is lethal and if you have any signs of bleeding or bruising please have someone take you to a hospital. Notify them you may have been exposed to a rodenticide through synthentic marijuana.

For more information on synthetic cannibis, readers are requested to read the moderator's comments on ProMED-mail posting Drug abuse - USA: (IL) synthetic cannabinoids, bleeding disorder Archive Number: <20180331.5720593>.

A map of Illinois, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5732582,216. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Drug abuse - USA: (IL) synthetic cannabinoids, bleeding disorder 20180331.5720593
Drug abuse - USA (02): (GA) pot. lethal unknown substance 20170609.5095236
Drug abuse - USA: (GA) pot. lethal unknown substance, RFI 20170608.5091370
2016
----
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA (02): (CA) 20160824.4437183
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA: (New York City) alert 20160718.4353090
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - UK 20160112.3929799
2015
----
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA (04): (NY) 20150507.3346435
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA (03): (LA) 20150501.3334873
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA (02): (AL) 20150427.3324558
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA: (NY) 20150419.3308552
2014
----
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - Russia: (KV, KM) 20140930.2819762
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA: (CO) 20140127.2233681
2013
----
Drug abuse, synthetic drugs - USA: (CO) contamination 20130830.1914246
.................................................sb/tg/ec/dk
</body>
