<header id=014127>
Published Date: 2014-10-30 05:21:27 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Chemical weapons - Iraq: chlorine gas
Archive Number: 20141030.2913879
</header>
<body id=014127>
CHEMICAL WEAPONS - IRAQ: CHLORINE GAS
*************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 23 Oct 2014
Source: Washington Post [edited]
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/islamic-state-militants-allegedly-used-chlorine-gas-against-iraqi-security-forces/2014/10/23/c865c943-1c93-4ac0-a7ed-033218f15cbb_story.html


Dizzy, vomiting and struggling to breathe, 11 Iraqi police officers were rushed to a government hospital 50 miles north of the capital last month [September 2014]. The diagnosis: poisoning by chlorine gas. The perpetrators, according to the officers: Islamic State extremists.

The chlorine attack appears to be the 1st confirmed use of chemical weapons by the Islamic State on the battlefield. An Iraqi Defense Ministry official corroborated the events, and doctors said survivors' symptoms were consistent with chlorine poisoning.

Iraqi forces say 2 other crude chlorine attacks have occurred since the extremists seized vast tracts of Iraqi territory this summer, but details on those incidents remain sketchy. The reported assaults all raise concerns that the militants are attempting to hone their chemical weapons capabilities as they push to control more ground.

The presence of a large former Iraqi chemical weapons production plant in territory seized by the Islamic State has compounded those fears, although officials and chemical weapons experts say the 2500 degraded rockets filled with nerve agents that remain there are unlikely to be fit for use. Weapons inspectors sealed them off with concrete in a bunker more than 20 years ago.

The Islamic State's reported chlorine attacks appear to have been largely ineffectual. The attack on the police officers last month is the only one officially documented.

Chlorine, a common component in industry, is sold legally, but its use as a weapon violates the Chemical Weapons Convention. It was widely employed in trench warfare during World War I, including infamously at Ypres in Belgium, where German forces dispersed more than 160 tons of chlorine into the breeze, killing thousands of French and Allied soldiers.

The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said last month [September 2014] that chlorine gas has been used "systematically" as a weapon in villages in northern Syria. The US government has blamed those attacks on the Syrian government. But it has been years since the chemical has been used in fighting in Iraq.

It was 4:20 p.m. on 15 Sep 2014 when the 11 police officers were rushed into the hospital emergency room in Balad [Salah ad-Din province]. Some struggled to stand; tears streamed from their eyes.

"They were panicked; we were panicked," said Kasim Hatim, the hospital's director. "We initially thought it might be a more serious gas, a nerve gas or an organophosphate."

The men had been brought in from the front lines of the nearby town of Duluiyah. Tucked into a bend of the Tigris River, the town had been under heavy assault for days, according to the accounts of 3 survivors. Islamic State fighters had taken territory to the north, cutting the only direct land access to the river town, and had blown up the last bridge into the town.

The police officers, all members of the Sunni Jabbour tribe, which has turned against the Islamic State, were guarding a line in the town's north. After an exchange of fire, they said, they were surprised to see Islamic State fighters retreating from their position about 150 yards away.

Suddenly there was a boom in the area the extremists had just vacated, said one of the survivors. "It was a strange explosion. We saw a yellow smoke in the sky," he said. The wind carried the fog toward their lines. The men say it hung close to the ground, consistent with the properties of chlorine gas, which is heavier than air.

"I felt suffocated," [the survivor] recalled. "I was throwing up and couldn't breathe."

Another officer, who suffers from asthma, said he passed out within minutes.

The men were taken to a small clinic in Duluiyah, before being transferred by boat to the larger hospital in Balad, where they were treated with oxygen and hydrocortisone, an anti-inflammatory medication, until the symptoms began to subside. They were all discharged the following morning.

The 4 physicians who treated them said there was no question that chlorine gas was to blame.

One physician on the team, Hassanain Mohammed, had treated similar cases before. In 2006 and 2007, al-Qaeda in Iraq, a group that later morphed into the Islamic State, carried out a string of chlorine bombings in the country.

Mohammed was on duty at a Baghdad hospital one day during that period when dozens of victims were brought in after a bombing in Taji district, just north of the capital, in which insurgents had packed a truck with explosives and 2 one-ton chlorine tanks.

There have been no confirmed accounts of the use of chlorine gas as a weapon in Iraq for several years.

An Iraqi Defense Ministry official confirmed this week that a bomb rigged with chlorine canisters was used in the Duluiyah attack.

"They use it just to create terror," said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to provide the information publicly. "But of course we are very concerned."

In a statement, the Defense Ministry confirmed that the Islamic State has used the gas in a "primitive and ineffective way" near water-treatment plants where it has gained access to chlorine, as well as in roadside bomb attacks. It did not specify the locations of the attacks, but there are several water plants near Duluiyah on territory controlled by the Islamic State.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Chlorine gas is a pulmonary irritant with intermediate water solubility that causes acute damage in the upper and lower respiratory tract. Occupational exposures constitute the highest risk for serious toxicity from high-concentration chlorine. Mixing of chlorine bleach (sodium hypochlorite) with ammonia or acidic cleaning agents is a common source of household exposure. As with all poisons, the dose determines the toxicity. Exposure to low concentrations of chlorine for prolonged periods may have destructive effects, as might very short-term exposure to high concentrations.

Symptoms may vary depending on the degree of exposure. Exposure possibilities include acute low levels, acute high levels, and chronic low levels.

Low-level (3-5 percent, 1-15 ppm) acute exposure:
Most poisonings fall into this category and are caused by household exposure to low-concentration cleaning products. Manifestations are as follows:
- Eye tearing, nose and throat irritation
- Sneezing
- Excess salivation
- General excitement or restlessness

High-level (20 percent, greater than 30 ppm) acute exposure:
In addition to the symptoms seen with low-level exposure, high-level exposure may result in the following:
- Dyspnea: Upper airway swelling and obstruction may occur
- Violent cough
- Nausea and vomiting (with the smell of chlorine in emesis)
- Lightheadedness
- Headache
- Chest pain or retrosternal burning
- Muscle weakness
- Abdominal discomfort
- Dermatitis (with liquid exposure): Corneal burns and ulcerations may occur from splash exposure to high-concentration chlorine products
- Esophageal perforation

Chronic exposure:
Manifestations of chronic exposure include the following:
- Acne (chloracne)
- Chest pain
- Cough
- Sore throat
- Hemoptysis (coughing up blood)

Findings on physical examination may include the following:
- Tachypnea (rapid breathing)
- Cyanosis (blue or purple coloration of the skin or mucous membranes; most prevalent during exertion)
- Tachycardia (rapid heart rate)
- Wheezing
- Intercostal retractions (when muscles between the ribs pull inward)
- Decreased breath sounds
- Rales (pulmonary edema)
- Nasal flaring
- Aphonia (loss of voice), stridor (high-pitched breathing sound), or laryngeal edema
- Ulceration or hemorrhage of the respiratory tract
- Rhinorrhea (runny nose)
- Lacrimation, salivation, and blepharospasm
- Chloracne or tooth enamel corrosion (with chronic exposure)
- Redness, erythema, and chemical burns to the skin from dose-dependent exposure to liquid

Abnormalities include hypoxia (from bronchospasm or pulmonary edema) and metabolic acidosis. The metabolic acidosis may be hyperchloremic (nonanion gap). Chest radiograph findings are frequently normal initially but later may show nonspecific abnormalities, pulmonary edema, pneumonitis, mediastinal free air, or signs of ARDS.

The most important aspect of treating patients exposed to chlorine gas is the provision of good supportive care. No antidotes are available. Emergency department personnel are at low risk for cross-contamination in cases of exposure to chlorine gas. However, the patient's clothing should be removed if it has been contaminated with liquid chlorine. Wear appropriate protective gear during decontamination, especially if the exact toxin is not identified.

Evaluate the airway, breathing, and circulation. Provide supplemental oxygen (humidified if possible) as necessary; depending on the patient's oxygen requirements, it may be delivered by nasal cannula, face mask, non-rebreather mask, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, or intubation. Severe respiratory distress indicates the need for endotracheal intubation. Because of the risk of laryngospasm, several back-up modalities should be available at the time of intubation (ie, fiberoptic laryngoscope, cricothyrotomy tray).

Positive pressure ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) set at 5-10 mm Hg may improve oxygenation in patients with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and allow for lower fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) settings. An FIO2 greater than 50 percent for longer than 24 hours may result in oxygen toxicity.

Closely monitor the patient's fluid input and output because of the potential of pulmonary edema. Fluid restriction may be required and diuretics may be used to treat impending pulmonary edema.

Treat initial bronchospasm with beta agonists such as albuterol. Ipratropium may be added. Poor responses may require terbutaline or aminophylline. Nebulized lidocaine (4 percent topical solution) may provide analgesia and reduce coughing.

Other medications that may be used in the treatment of chlorine gas exposure include nebulized sodium bicarbonate and inhaled or systemic corticosteroids; however, evidence of efficacy is mixed. No evidence supports the use of prophylactic antibiotics.

Patients with skin or eye exposure to chlorine require copious irrigation with saline. Consider ophthalmologic consultation for patients with significant ocular involvement.

Consider admission and observation for the following patients, even if they are initially asymptomatic, as they are at increased risk of progression to respiratory failure:

As sad as this chlorine attack is, it is likely that IS or ISIS or ISIL (all the same thing) will try other chemical attacks.

Some reports believe the old stashes of chemical weapons would not be affected. I am not inclined to agree with those commenters that the use of the chemicals found from Saddam Hussein's stash or program of chemical weapons would not cause problems or be nearly impossible to use or would have no effect.

These people (IS) are driven to kill at any cost, and are resourceful to finding a way to make these chemicals work.

The recent report by the New York Times, "The Secret Casualties of Iraq's Abandoned Chemical Weapons" by C. J. Chivers (http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/10/14/world/middleeast/us-casualties-of-iraq-chemical-weapons.html) tells a chilling tale of discovery of those abandoned weapons and how they have caused casualties, clearly indicating those old chemicals are still very problematic.

Readers are encouraged to visit the link and read the article. It is a bit long for posting here but has excellent information about the chemical weapons situation there.

In part:
"From 2004 to 2011, American and American-trained Iraqi troops repeatedly encountered, and on at least 6 occasions were wounded by, chemical weapons remaining from years earlier in Saddam Hussein's rule.

"In all, American troops secretly reported finding roughly 5000 chemical warheads, shells or aviation bombs, according to interviews with dozens of participants, Iraqi and American officials, and heavily redacted intelligence documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.

"The New York Times found 17 American service members and 7 Iraqi police officers who were exposed to nerve or mustard agents after 2003. American officials said that the actual tally of exposed troops was slightly higher, but that the government's official count was classified.

"The secrecy fit a pattern. Since the outset of the war, the scale of the United States' encounters with chemical weapons in Iraq was neither publicly shared nor widely circulated within the military. These encounters carry worrisome implications now that the Islamic State, a Qaeda splinter group, controls much of the territory where the weapons were found.

"Then, during the long occupation, American troops began encountering old chemical munitions in hidden caches and roadside bombs. Typically 155-millimeter artillery shells or 122-millimeter rockets, they were remnants of an arms program Iraq had rushed into production in the 1980s during the Iran-Iraq war.

"All had been manufactured before 1991, participants said. Filthy, rusty or corroded, a large fraction of them could not be readily identified as chemical weapons at all. Some were empty, though many of them still contained potent mustard agent or residual sarin. Most could not have been used as designed, and when they ruptured dispersed the chemical agents over a limited area, according to those who collected the majority of them.

"As Iraq has been shaken anew by violence, and past security gains have collapsed amid Sunni-Shiite bloodletting and the rise of the Islamic State, this long-hidden chronicle illuminates the persistent risks of the country's abandoned chemical weapons.

"Many chemical weapons incidents clustered around the ruins of the Muthanna State Establishment, the center of Iraqi chemical agent production in the 1980s.

"Since June [2014], the compound has been held by the Islamic State, the world's most radical and violent jihadist group. In a letter sent to the United Nations this summer, the Iraqi government said that about 2500 corroded chemical rockets remained on the grounds, and that Iraqi officials had witnessed intruders looting equipment before militants shut down the surveillance cameras.

"The United States government says the abandoned weapons no longer pose a threat. But nearly a decade of wartime experience showed that old Iraqi chemical munitions often remained dangerous when re-purposed for local attacks in makeshift bombs, as insurgents did starting by 2004.

"Several participants said the United States lost track of chemical weapons that its troops found, left large caches unsecured, and did not warn people -- Iraqis and foreign troops alike -- as it hastily exploded chemical ordnance in the open air.

"German construction firms helped create a sprawling manufacturing complex in the desert south of Samarra and 3 plants in Falluja that made precursor ingredients for chemical weapons. The complex near Samarra, later renamed Al Muthanna State Establishment, included research labs, production lines, testing areas and storage bunkers."

While some this construction work took place in the early 90s or prior to that, the issue at the moment is that so many chemicals remain in the area that IS is currently controlling or fighting to gain control of. The New York Times articles provides many more chilling documented facts regarding the chemical weapons and where stashes have been found. The article further provides details of exposed US soldiers and the implications for use of these old chemicals in the wrong hands.

Chemical weapons are serious, whether in local areas or in large areas. They cause a great amount of human suffering, and death. Remember the goal of IS is to control their own state, which is not an insignificant amount of territory.

Other links of interest are:
http://atwar.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/10/16/an-iraq-veterans-experience-with-chemical-weapons/
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/16/opinion/a-deadly-legacy-in-iraq.html

Portions of this comment were extracted from: http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/832336-overview. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2913879,89.]
See Also
Chemical weapons - Syria (03): chlorine gas susp 20140525.2496768
2013
----
Chemical weapons - Syria (07) 20130825.1900325
Chemical weapons - Syria (06): suspect attack, RFI 20130821.1892712
Chemical weapons - Syria (05): sarin 20130615.1774393
Chemical weapons - Syria (04): sarin 20130606.1757059
Chemical weapons - Syria (03): sarin 20130605.1755498
Chemical weapons - Syria (02): investigation 20130321.1597374
Chemical weapons - Syria: claims of civilian losses 20130320.1595751
1999
----
Sarin gas, sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) (02) 19990327.0480
Sarin gas sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) 19990203.0157
.................................................sb/mj/tg/je/dk
</body>
