<header id=000365>
Published Date: 2013-08-24 20:00:05 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Chemical weapons - Syria (07)
Archive Number: 20130825.1900325
</header>
<body id=000365>
CHEMICAL WEAPONS - SYRIA (07)
*****************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 23 Aug 2013
Source: Indianapolis Star, USA Today report [edited]
http://www.indystar.com/usatoday/article/2686971


Some 1st responders to a reported chemical attack in Syria have died after treating victims, providing more evidence that a weapon of mass destruction was indeed used, opposition forces said Thursday [22 Aug 2013].

"Some of them came down with similar symptoms and passed away," said Khaled Saleh, a spokesman for the Supreme Military Council of the Free Syrian Army, which the United States has provided with non-lethal aid. Saleh said at least 6 doctors had died after treating victims. "We don't have the (total) number of dead 1st responders yet," he said.

Despite seemingly overwhelming evidence, the Syrian government continues to deny that it used chemical weapons. [About 36] countries, including the US, have now called for a United Nations investigation. [While there is currently a UN team of investigators there, this is not the location the investigators were to be investigating. They are not cleared to go to this site. It would seem expedient to provide for their safety and get them to this site so that the most accurate investigation may be done. - Mod.TG]

Saleh said he learned Thursday [22 Aug 2013] that one of the people he had been in touch with Wednesday [21 Aug 2013] who was treating people injured in the attack had later passed away.

Between 800 and 1700 people died Wednesday after a rocket attack on the Damascus suburb of Eastern Ghouta, according to the Syrian opposition, which reported receiving victims in area hospitals and that more bodies were found in house-to-house searches Thursday.

Dan Layman, a spokesman for the Syrian Support Group, which supports the Free Syrian Army in Washington, said doctors, nurses and 1st responders had reported Wednesday that they'd experienced secondary symptoms while working with victims.

"The doctor I was talking to yesterday said the residue on the victims and their clothing was making the doctors get dizzy and have trouble breathing and (they) had to pour water on their faces and had to step out of the room," Layman said.

Layman said he learned Thursday that 2 of those nurses died.

The reports come as the State Department says the US government is still trying to find out what happened.

"There's a great sense of urgency in the administration to gather information on the ground," State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said. "If these reports are true, it would be a flagrant use of chemical weapons by the regime. The president will consider his options and discuss it with his national security team."

A United Nations inspection team was in Damascus on Thursday [22 Aug 2013] to investigate 3 sites of earlier alleged chemical attacks, and Secretary of State John Kerry wants that team to have access to the site of Wednesday's alleged attack, Psaki said.

The United States and the UN team believe the armed opposition in Syria does not have chemical weapons capability, Psaki said.

"Given the UN team is on the ground right now, we're working to put pressure on the Syrian regime to allow access," she said.

One chemical weapons expert looking at the evidence says video from the scenes of the attack are inconsistent with known chemical weapons injuries.

YouTube videos posted by Syrian activists of children gasping for air while being rinsed with water by barehanded medical personnel are not consistent with chemical weapons known to be in the Syrian arsenal, said Dan Kaszeta, managing director of UK-based security consultancy Strongpoint Security. Kaszeta worked 20 years on chemical biological and nuclear defense in the US government and military.

Kaszeta said the videos show convulsions that affect some limbs but not all; no skin burns or blisters, which would indicate mustard gas; and no vomiting. He did not have access to any of the victims and his opinions are based solely on the video.

"(With) sarin or nerve agents there would be much more widespread symptoms," he said. "We need physical evidence, blood, urine, tissue, a chest X-ray of one of these guys who died."

Another chemical weapons expert, Hamish de Bretton-Gordon, the former commander of the chemical, biological and nuclear counterterrorism unit at the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defense, says a low-dose chemical weapons attack may explain the absence of some symptoms.

In March 1995, when the Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo launched a sarin attack injuring about 6000 people, 1st responders who were not present for the attack but treated victims later also experienced symptoms, Bretton-Gordon said.

Saleh said activists in the vicinity of Wednesday's attack have collected samples of victims' hair and blood, of soil and of pieces of munitions that landed in the area, but getting them to someone who can analyze them is another matter.

"The challenge is getting them out," Saleh said. "That area is completely surrounded by Assad's forces. You can't even get wheat in there to make bread."

[Byline: Oren Dorell]

--
Communicated by:
Stephen M. Apatow
Humanitarian Resource Institute
<s.m.apatow@humanitarian.net>

******
[2]
Date: Sat 24 Aug 2013
Source: Doctors Without Borders/Medecins Sans Frontieres [edited]
http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/press/release.cfm?id=7029&cat=press-release#sthash.Wvfr0ao6.dpuf


In Syria's Damascus governorate, 3 hospitals that are supported by the international medical humanitarian organization Doctors Without Borders/Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) have reported to MSF that they received approximately 3600 patients displaying neurotoxic symptoms in less than 3 hours on the morning of Wednesday, 21 Aug 2013. Of those patients, 355 reportedly died.

Since 2012, MSF has built a strong and reliable collaboration with medical networks, hospitals and medical points in the Damascus governorate, and has been providing them with drugs, medical equipment and technical support. Due to significant security risks, MSF staff members have not been able to access the facilities.

"Medical staff working in these facilities provided detailed information to MSF doctors regarding large numbers of patients arriving with symptoms including convulsions, excess saliva, pinpoint pupils, blurred vision and respiratory distress," said Dr. Bart Janssens, MSF director of operations.

Patients were treated using MSF-supplied atropine, a drug used to treat neurotoxic symptoms. MSF is now trying to replenish the facilities' empty stocks and provide additional medical supplies and guidance.

"MSF can neither scientifically confirm the cause of these symptoms nor establish who is responsible for the attack," said Dr. Janssens. "However, the reported symptoms of the patients, in addition to the epidemiological pattern of the events -- characterized by the massive influx of patients in a short period of time, the origin of the patients, and the contamination of medical and 1st aid workers -- strongly indicate mass exposure to a neurotoxic agent. This would constitute a violation of international humanitarian law, which absolutely prohibits the use of chemical and biological weapons."

In addition to 1600 vials of atropine supplied over recent months, MSF has now dispatched 7000 additional vials to facilities in the area. Treatment of neurotoxic patients is now being fully integrated into MSF's medical strategies in all its programs in Syria.

"MSF hopes that independent investigators will be given immediate access to shed light on what happened," said Christopher Stokes, MSF general director. "This latest attack and subsequent massive medical need come on top of an already catastrophic humanitarian situation, characterised by extreme violence, displacement, and deliberate destruction of medical facilities. In the case of such extreme violations of humanitarian law, humanitarian assistance cannot respond effectively and becomes meaningless itself."

--
Communicated by:
Philip Henika
USDA Agricultural Research Service
<philiphe@yahoo.com>

[While it appears there may have been use of a nerve agent, it is clearly uncertain as to the type of agent or the responsible party.

Some of the videos and reports are somewhat confusing. Some videos show large dilated pupils, which is inconsistent with a nerve agent poisoning. Nerve agents cause small, pinpoint pupils and the appropriate treatment is atropine. Both articles indicate a deficiency of atropine. However, if some of the videos showed victims of the chemical agent attack after receiving atropine, then the large, dilated pupils may be seen.

Also, reports of 1st responders being affected are consistent with a nerve agent. Other reports indicating that those in the basements were more severely affected. Some chemical weapons are heavier than air and may well settle into basements or low lying areas.

The location is what is inconsistent with these reports. There are large numbers of women and children affected in this incident. The explosion allegedly happened at about 3:00 AM, when people were sleeping, yet videos show victims fully clothed in street clothes.

Therefore, one has to wonder if this could have been a rebel group moving a newly developed agent when an accidental explosion occurred in a neighborhood.

If this were the doing of Assad forces, then the target of homes and women and children would be more unlikely as it would bring down the wrath of an international community. Or was the explosion from a rocket that was misdirected, or erred off course?

Another alternative may be that terrorists not associated with the rebels or the Assad forces are looking to intensify the civil war, and possibly cause more confusion, leading to an easier takeover by the terrorist group.

Regardless of who claims responsibility or blame, it is a sad situation. Hopefully medical supplies will be replenished, and the culprits identified and prevented from committing such acts again. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/3aLZ.]
See Also
Chemical weapons - Syria (06): suspect attack, RFI 20130821.1892712
Chemical weapons - Syria (05): sarin 20130615.1774393
Chemical weapons - Syria (04): sarin 20130606.1757059
Chemical weapons - Syria (03): sarin 20130605.1755498
Chemical weapons - Syria (02): investigation 20130321.1597374
Chemical weapons - Syria: claims of civilian losses 20130320.1595751
1999
----
Sarin gas, sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) (02) 19990327.0480
Sarin gas sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) 19990203.0157
.................................................sb/tg/je/lm
</body>
