<header id=043986>
Published Date: 2019-05-06 18:40:13 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Tilapia lake virus - China: fish
Archive Number: 20190506.6457398
</header>
<body id=043986>
TILAPIA LAKE VIRUS - CHINA: FISH
********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 6 May 2019
Source: South China Morning Post [edited]
https://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/health-wellness/article/3008691/tilapia-fish-feed-world-and-deadly-virus-may-destroy-it


A small African fish called the tilapia may be vital for meeting the future food needs of humanity, according to scientists, but they are also concerned that a killer disease discovered in recent years could wipe out the species. That, they warn, would have devastating social and economic consequences for China and the rest of the Asia-Pacific region.

Although its name may not be widely known, the freshwater tilapia is 2nd only to carp as the world's most widely farmed fish, and China is the largest producer. With global production of farmed tilapia reaching 6.3 million tonnes in 2018 and an estimated market value of USD 9.8 billion, the little fish is big business. That's because it is an essential source of protein, revenue and employment in the developing world.

An advantage of farming tilapia was once its resistance to disease, which is a constant problem in intensive fish farming. But a new virus has caught the industry off guard. Tilapia lake virus (TiLV), or _Tilapia tilapinevirus_, was identified in 2014.

Scientists know little more about it, except that it has a morbidity rate of up to 90 per cent, depending on the strain, and is highly contagious. The 1st indication of the virus on a fish farm is lots of dead tilapia.

"It's definitely alarming," says Mohan Chadag, principal scientist (aquaculture) for World Fish, an international non-profit organisation supporting fishing and aquaculture research headquartered in Penang, Malaysia.

The tilapia lake virus was discovered in Israel and Ecuador. It has since been reported in 12 other nations and regions, including many in Asia: Thailand (2015), Indonesia and India (2016), the Philippines, Malaysia and Taiwan (2017). Mexico reported its 1st cases in 2018.

Widely regarded as the "poor man's fish", tilapia grows quickly, and worldwide production is almost double that of Atlantic salmon. It has rapidly become a vital source of cheap protein for growing populations in the developing world as wild fish stocks dwindle.

About 42 per cent of all fish the world consumes is farmed, and that proportion is set to rise to more than 50 per cent within a decade, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.

Tilapia is key to this growth, and it's not just poor nations that eat it; it's the 4th most consumed fish in the United States

Tilapia production is undertaken in 87 countries, and it's particularly big business in Asia, which produces more than 70 per cent of the total.

China, which so far has not reported a single outbreak of the killer virus, is the world's top producer, at 1.8 million tonnes in 2016, according to the China Fishery Statistical Yearbook 2017, and has probably risen since. Other major producers include Indonesia, Egypt, Bangladesh, Viet Nam, the Philippines, Brazil and Thailand.

Protecting tilapia has become a global priority, and with more than 5 million fish farmers, China is the country with most to lose from an outbreak, Chadag says.

"The worst-case scenario is there will be a mass closure of farms and loss of livelihood for millions of individuals," he adds.

The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), the intergovernmental organisation coordinating, supporting and promoting animal disease control, held a Global Conference on Aquatic Animal Health in Santiago, Chile, last month [April 2019], where usually sober experts uttered words such as "panic," and "emergency."

"Across the board, there is a heightened awareness of [the virus], and this will be the case in China, too," says Dr Matthew Stone, deputy director general (international standards and science) of the organisation, speaking via phone from Santiago.

Stone says outbreaks of aquatic animal diseases such as the tilapia lake virus will threaten the sustainability of the rapidly expanding aquaculture sector unless governance of veterinary and aquatic animal health services is strengthened and OIE standards implemented. A particular concern is the international trade in live fish for breeding purposes.

"Of course, we have concerns about transmission of this virus via international trade," admits Professor Hong Liu, a Chinese member of the OIE's aquatic animal health standards commission.

In September 2017, Liu was a keynote speaker at the "Emergency Regional Consultation on Prevention and Management of Tilapia Lake Virus in the Asia-Pacific" conference held in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou. That the event was held indicated just how seriously the threat is being taken.

"There is no commercial vaccine and no treatment available," says Liu. She emphasises, however, that although the disease is not zoonotic (it cannot directly infect humans), the possibly catastrophic social and economic consequences are a huge concern.

China's tilapia industry, located mostly in southern Guangdong, Hainan and Guangxi provinces, has enjoyed spectacular growth over recent years, with farms ranging from sophisticated hi-tech corporate operations to one man and a muddy pond.

In December 2018, the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation published an official risk assessment of the tilapia lake virus that makes uncomfortable reading for Chinese fish farmers. The experts' report assesses the risk to China as "high" and recommends the restriction of tilapia imports into the country to protect the industry.

It also concludes that the virus is already likely to have spread undetected beyond nations listed by the OIE. The only countermeasure is biosecurity, management measures implemented to avoid the disease, experts say.

While control on the international trade of fish for breeding is considered essential, there are other basic measures that can be taken. Isolating water supplies, controlling the movement of people and equipment in and out of farms, and briefing local veterinary sectors, are all important.

Norway requires that every salmon imported for breeding undergoes vaccination against key pathogens, but there is no vaccination against tilapia lake virus, even it was practical to implement the policy.

Where there is active trade, shared water sources, and where borders are shared with infected countries (China and Thailand, for example) there is significantly increased risk, Liu says.

Early reporting is also essential to contain the disease, but there are concerns about the reporting culture in China and other Asian nations. Would small-scale rural farmers alert the authorities about concerns with the risk of having their business closed down and a possible imposition of sanctions or punishment? If the mortality rate was relatively low, would they even know that their stock had been infected?

"Having a culture of reporting and proper documentation is a big problem," Chadag admits.

There is no large-scale tilapia production in Hong Kong, but the fish is farmed as a co-cultured species in farms with a polyculture system, mainly for grass carp.

"The Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department has been following the development of tilapia lake virus closely, and there is no report of [the virus] in Hong Kong so far," says a department spokeswoman.

She adds that the best way to address any disease problems in aquaculture is to enhance biosecurity with good husbandry methods promoted by the department through seminars and during regular farm visits. The department also offers a free pathogen screening service, including for tilapia lake virus.

Such measures must be implemented and adhered to on a global scale if killer pathogens such as the tilapia lake virus are not to wipe out an essential source of protein, revenue and employment in Asia, experts say.

According to Liu, China is following OIE guidelines and Chinese laws and regulations so that notification, surveillance, epidemiological survey and early detection measures can be taken.

Privately, many wildlife and aquatic vets not affiliated with OIE fear it is inevitable the disease will reach China, probably sooner rather than later, and it may have arrived already.

"Even if surveillance is carried out, the pathogen may still be there," says Chadag, adding that it could be very bad news for China's 5 million fish farmers and the region in general.

[Byline: Stuart Heaver]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[Tilapia lake virus (TiLV), the cause of tilapia syncytial hepatitis, is a newly emerging virus associated with significant mortalities in farmed tilapia. Since the 1st discovery of the virus in Israel in 2014, cases have been reported in Columbia, Ecuador, Egypt and Thailand. Now that screening tools are available and can be accessed by fish disease diagnostic/research labs, the number of reported TiLV cases is expected to rise. There has been no report of any human health-related issues linked to the consumption of affected tilapia from any of the affected countries since the emergence of TiLV. Looking at fish viruses overall, including TiLV, there is no evidence for a fish virus causing disease in humans.

The emergence of TiLV is the 1st-ever major disease epidemic reported in tilapia aquaculture and puts the global industry at risk. Irresponsible trade in live aquatic animals and intensification without biosecurity considerations significantly compound this risk. Tilapia is one of the most widely-cultured species in the world. It is hardy and can be farmed under diverse farming systems with little environmental impact, making it an important aquatic food source contributing to global food and nutritional security. Tilapia has been domesticated and, now, several strains of genetically improved tilapia are farmed around the world. Global production of tilapia is estimated at 6.4 million metric tons (MMT). In 2015, the top 3 producers were the People's Republic of China (1.78 MMT), Indonesia (1.12 MMT) and Egypt (0.88 MMT). Other leading producers include Bangladesh, Viet Nam and Philippines (FAO 2017)(1) [(1) [FAO] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2017. Fishery and Aquaculture Statistics. Global production by production source 1950-2015 (FishstatJ). In: FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department [online]. Rome. Updated 2017. http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/software/fishstatj/en.

Mass mortalities of farmed tilapia (20-90 percent) are an indicative sign of infection with TiLV. Gross signs include dermal lesions and ulcers, ocular abnormalities, opacity of lens, loss of appetite, slow movement, gathering in the pond bottom and reduced schooling behavior.

Presently, histopathology and PCR (RT-PCR and semi-nested RT-PCR) have been described and used to detect and confirm TiLV. Considering the seriousness of infection with TiLV, it is suggested that samples from mortality events be screened for TiLV. WorldFish also recommends that tilapia breeding programs and multiplication centers/hatcheries include mandatory TiLV screening for their seed before selling to hatcheries or grow out farmers.

Currently, there is limited epidemiological information available. What's known is that outbreaks appear more during summer months; different strains of tilapia are affected; in polyculture systems, other species like mullets and carps do not die. There is an urgent need to gather more information through epidemiological studies to identify methods of transmission, survival of TiLV outside the host or in frozen fish, carriers, and potential risk factors for disease outbreaks. These findings will enable the development and testing of management interventions to minimize the impact of TiLV.

There is no treatment for viral pathogens. The impact of TiLV has to be managed through farm-level management interventions, stricter biosecurity controls and restricted/regulated movement of animals from affected farms. Published studies show that fish that survive TiLV become resistant to infection. Currently, no vaccines are available but may be in the future.

This is a very serious disease. Owners who suspect it should act rapidly. Countries who have found this disease should act very rapidly. Farm biosecurity is extremely important. Just because the crop grows in the water does not mean biosecurity can be lax. This virus has no mercy! Heed the warning, increase biosecurity.

Using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the presented work expands on the ultrastructural findings of an earlier report on "syncytial hepatitis," a novel disease of tilapia (SHT). Briefly, TEM confirmed the presence of an orthomyxovirus-like virus within the diseased hepatocytes but not within the endothelium. This was supported by observing extracellular and intracellular (mostly intraendosomal), 60-100 nm round virions with a trilaminar capsid containing up to 7 electron-dense aggregates. Other patterns noted included enveloped or filamentous virions and virion-containing cytoplasmic membrane folds, suggestive of endocytosis. Patterns atypical for orthymyxovirus included the formation of syncytia and the presence of virions within the perinuclear cisternae (suspected to be the Golgi apparatus). The ultrastructural morphology of SHT-associated virions is similar to that previously reported for tilapia lake virus (TiLV). A genetic homology was investigated using the available reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) probes for TiLV and comparing clinically sick with clinically normal fish and negative controls. By RT-PCR analysis, viral nucleic acid was detected only in diseased fish. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that a virus is causally associated with SHT, that this virus shares ultrastructural features with orthomyxoviruses, and it presents with partial genetic homology with TiLV (190 nucleotides) https://www.researchgate.net/publication/306047852_Syncytial_Hepatitis_of_Tilapia_Oreochromis_niloticus_L_is_Associated_With_Orthomyxovirus-Like_Virions_in_Hepatocytes.

Portions of this comment were extracted from: http://pubs.iclarm.net/resource_centre/FISH-2017-03.pdf. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map available at:
China: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6457398,155]
See Also
2018
----
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Peru: (PI) OIE 20180301.5658787
2017
----
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Philippines: (BU) OIE 20171124.5463998
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis: Malaysia, Thailand, emerging disease, OIE 20170926.5342212
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Taiwan (03): (Taoyuan) update 20170710.5163223
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Taiwan (02): (Taoyuan City) emerging disease, spread 20170620.5118988
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Taiwan: (Taoyuan City) emerging disease, OIE 20170614.5105570
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Israel (02): (HZ) emerging disease, OIE, follow-up 20170605.5084485
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - worldwide: FAO, alert 20170528.5067919
Tilapia syncytial hepatitis - Israel: (HZ) emerging disease, OIE 20170524.5059646
2015
----
Novel RNA virus - Israel: tilapia, lethal 20150127.3122740
2012
----
Undiagnosed disease, fish - Israel: (HZ), blindness, RFI 20120731.1223207
2011
----
Undiagnosed disease, fish - Israel: (HZ), blindness, RFI 20111028.3213
2006
----
Undiagnosed tilapia die-off - Nicaragua (Coco River), RFI 20060211.04
.................................................tg/msp/lm
</body>
