<header id=031830>
Published Date: 2011-06-28 16:30:30 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Rinderpest - worldwide (03): global eradication
Archive Number: 20110628.1973
</header>
<body id=031830>
RINDERPEST - WORLDWIDE (03): GLOBAL ERADICATION
***********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

******
[1]
Date: Tue 28 Jun 2011
Source: 37th FAO Conference Plenary Session, FAO Headquarters, Rome
[edited]


[A special session of FAO's Annual Conference, assembled in Rome on
28 Jun 2011, composed of Ministers of Agriculture of member countries,
officially adopted the FAO-OIE declaration on global freedom from
Rinderpest. The keynote speech in he adoption session was delivered by
Prof Peter C. Doherty, Nobel Laureate 1996, Melbourne. We find it
appropriate to reproduce this remarkable speech, addressing a
remarkable achievement.]

A great achievement and the road ahead
--------------------------------------
Your Excellencies, friends and colleagues,
My role in this assembly is, I believe, to speak as a scientist and
to convey the congratulations of the broader scientific community.
Congratulations to the key policy makers and facilitators of the FAO
and the OIE, congratulations to the political leaders and
administrators in the various Nation States and, above all,
congratulations to the people on the ground, the veterinary
scientists, the laboratory workers, the field officers, the
communicators, the farmers and the cattle herders who brought the
scourge of rinderpest to an end.

Then, as a research scientist who has spent a long career working on
animal virus infections and immunity, it may be appropriate for me to
say a little about the issues that remain as we seek to deal with
other problematic virus diseases. Modern molecular science is
immensely powerful though, to tell the truth, it played little part in
the eradication of rinderpest.

Nowhere is the "one world" concept of veterinary and human medicine
more relevant than in the area of microbial disease. That's true of
the zoonoses like, for example, ebola, rabies, SARS and Nipah virus,
all bat-borne infections that transmit to us, often via a domestic
animal "amplifier." Then, there's the issue of nutritional deficit in
a world that FAO estimates has in excess of a billion people in
hunger. When it comes to countering inadequate micronutrient, calorie
and high value protein intake, alleviating the toll of infectious
disease in both animals and people has to be a major priority.

Though not a zoonosis in the conventional sense, contemporary
molecular genetic approaches suggest that rinderpest virus and human
measles virus evolved from a common ancestor some 10 to 12 centuries
back. Now, as we celebrate the eradication of rinderpest its sibling,
measles, is still with us. As a one-host pathogen of humans, it should
also be possible to eliminate measles from the planet. The problem is
the anti-vaccination movements in the advanced countries. Many young
parents in Europe, the USA and so forth have never seen the common
diseases of childhood and, though they may be well educated in the
liberal arts sense, know little of pathology and do not accept that
vaccination is a collective responsibility.

We should also say a little of the scientific background to the
eradication of rinderpest. The vaccine used was developed decades back
by World Food Prize Laureate, the late Walter Plowright, who built on
earlier experiments by scientists like JT Edwards at what is now the
Indian Veterinary Research Institute. In fact, the history of trying
to deal with rinderpest by some form of controlled infection goes back
to times before Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch established the germ
theory of infectious disease in the mid to late 19th century.

The same is true for smallpox, the only other virus that has ever
been eliminated. Way back in 1796, Edward Jenner took his original
vaccinia virus from the teat of an infected cow. Meeting in Rome we
recall that "Vacca" is the Latin word for cow, so vaccination itself
has a bovine origin. By the 1920's, following the broad principle of
attenuation discovered for fowl cholera (the 2nd ever vaccine) by
Louis Pasteur, Edwards used 600 serial transfers through goats to
establish a less virulent strain of rinderpest virus. Then the safer
and cheaper Plowright vaccine was developed much later by passage
through tissue culture.

Scientifically at least, the eradication of rinderpest reflects
approaches based in long-established quarantine and test and slaughter
policies, and what might be described as 'steam" virology. Given the
resources and the political will, it is clearly feasible to think in
terms of controlling some other major infections of domestic animals
in this way. Obvious candidates are the rinderpest-like PPR and,
perhaps, Newcastle disease and foot and mouth disease.

Other infections, like African swine fever look almost as difficult
as human HIV/AIDS. Despite spending hundreds of millions of dollars
and applying every relevant advance in molecular technology, AIDS
remains refractory when it comes to vaccine development. Though the
chemists and pharmacologist have done well, drug therapy has little
relevance to infections of domestic animals. We can't give up on AIDS
vaccines, but it is important to ask the question whether vaccination
is the way to go when it comes to all veterinary infectious diseases.

Some infections, like avian influenza, will always be with us. A
broad spectrum of influenza A viruses is maintained in nature by a
diversity of wild water fowl. There is thus no obvious way that these
viruses could ever be eliminated from the planet. Vaccination has only
been partially effective in controlling the continuing, high-path H5N1
epidemic, which has, to date, led to the loss of some 500 million to a
billion domestic chickens. That represents an enormous loss, both of
high value protein and in economic terms.

What may well be feasible with a rapidly reproducing species like the
domestic chicken is to use contemporary molecular science to establish
genetically-modified birds that resist infection with all influenza A
viruses. Apart from the benefits to producers and consumers, removing
the mutant virus incubators that large chicken houses represent should
also serve to minimize the emergence of novel pandemic viruses that
infect humans and/or other domestic animal species. Early experiments
look encouraging, but a major issue here is the acceptability of such
GM birds for human consumption.

Science continues to offer extraordinary possibilities for the
control of animal disease. There is no lack of talent in the
veterinary research community, which functions as part of the "one
world" of modern molecular technology and medicine. What is essential
is to maintain the necessary funding and, when innovative solutions
are reached, to ensure that novel strategies for disease control are
socially acceptable. Clearly, we need continued leadership and
co-ordination from the FAO and the OIE, working in concert with other
International Agencies and the various Nation States. Sustaining
animal agriculture and strong veterinary services must continue to be
a major, global priority as we seek to feed all the human family.

--
Peter C Doherty DVSc FRS,
Nobel Laureate for Medicine

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>


******
[2]
Date: 28 Jun 2011
Source: New York Times [summarised, edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/28/health/28rinderpest.html?_r=2&pagewanted=1&ref=science


Rinderpest, Scourge of Cattle, Is Vanquished
--------------------------------------------
On Tuesday [28 Jun 2011] in a ceremony in Rome, the United Nations is
officially declaring that for only the 2nd time in history, a disease
has been wiped off the face of the earth.

The disease is rinderpest.

Everyone has heard of smallpox. Very few have heard of the runner-up.


That's because rinderpest is an epizootic, an animal disease. The
name means "cattle plague" in German, and it is a relative of the
measles virus that infects cloven-hoofed beasts, including cattle,
buffaloes, large antelopes and deer, pigs and warthogs, even giraffes
and wildebeests. The most virulent strains killed 95 percent of the
herds they attacked.

But rinderpest is hardly irrelevant to humans. It has been blamed for
speeding the fall of the Roman Empire, aiding the conquests of Genghis
Khan and hindering those of Charlemagne, opening the way for the
French and Russian Revolutions, and subjugating East Africa to
colonization.

Any society dependent on cattle -- or relatives like African zebu,
Asian water buffaloes or Himalayan yaks -- was vulnerable.

As meat and milk, cattle were and are both food and income to peasant
farmers, as well as the source of calves to sell and manure for
fields. Until recently, they were the tractors that dragged plows and
the trucks that hauled crops to market. When herds die, their owners
starve.

The long but little-known campaign to conquer rinderpest is a tribute
to the skill and bravery of "large animal" veterinarians, who fought
the disease in remote and sometimes war-torn areas -- across arid
stretches of Africa bigger than Europe, in the Arabian desert and on
the Mongolian steppes.

"The role of veterinarians in protecting society is
underappreciated," said Dr. Juan Lubroth, chief veterinary officer of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, at whose
headquarters Tuesday's ceremony is being held. "We do more than just
take care of fleas, bathe mascots and vaccinate Pooch."

The victory is also proof that the conquest of smallpox was not just
an unrepeatable fluke, a golden medical moment that will never be seen
again. Since it was declared eradicated in 1980, several other
diseases -- like polio, Guinea worm, river blindness, elephantiasis,
measles and iodine deficiency -- have frustrated intensive, costly
efforts to do the same to them. The eradication of rinderpest shows
what can be done when field commanders combine scientific advances and
new tactics.

In 1998, a longtime leader of the effort, Sir Gordon R. Scott, of the
Center for Tropical Veterinary Medicine at the University of
Edinburgh, wrote an article saying he had reluctantly concluded that
it would fail.

"The major obstacle," he wrote, "is man's inhumanity to man.
Rinderpest thrives in a milieu of armed conflict and fleeing refugee
masses. Until world peace is secured, the nays win the argument."

He cited Somalia, Sudan, Sri Lanka, Yemen and Kurdish parts of Iraq
and Turkey as areas where war drove animals and their owners over
borders and life was risky for vaccinators.

Dr. Scott will not be in Rome for the ceremony; he died in 2004. Yet
perhaps without realizing it, he did outlive rinderpest. The last
known case was in a wild buffalo tested in Mount Meru National Park in
Kenya in 2001.

The modern eradication campaign began in 1945, when the Food and
Agriculture Organization [FAO] was founded. But it became feasible
only as vaccines improved. An 1893 version made from the bile of
convalescent animals was replaced by vaccines grown in goats and
rabbits and finally in laboratory cell lines; a heat-stable version
was developed in the 1980s.

How long the ancient battle went on is uncertain. Although cattle
die-offs did affect all the historical events mentioned above, there
is uncertainty about which were from rinderpest and which were
something else, like anthrax.

Death from rinderpest is rapid and nasty. Animals get feverish; their
eyes and noses run. Their digestive tracts are inflamed from mouth to
anus, and they die of diarrhea and protein loss.

But other diseases have overlapping symptoms, and a rapid diagnostic
test that could be used next to a dying animal was not developed until
the 1990s.

Last year, Japanese geneticists studying rinderpest's mutation
patterns estimated that until about A.D. 1000, it was virtually
identical to measles -- making it likely that pandemics that killed
only animals before that time had other causes, like anthrax or
possibly an ancestor virus from which both measles and rinderpest
evolved.

Some experts now believe the disease arose in the gray oxen of the
Central Asian steppes and was swept forward in the trains of baggage
and beasts that followed the Mongol armies in the 1200s as they
conquered Eurasia from China to Poland.

Like smallpox, rinderpest settled into a pattern of irregularly
recurring pandemics, sometimes touched off by imports of Russian
steppe cattle, in which the disease smoldered but rarely killed. The
longer between waves, the more victims died.

With the exception of a brief, contained outbreak in Brazil in 1920,
it did not reach the Americas. It touched Australia in 1923, but the
authorities there stamped it out by slaughtering 3000 animals.

Despite its proximity to Eurasia, Africa was spared until 1887, when
the Italian Army, struggling to conquer Abyssinia, imported Indian
cattle for food and draft power.

>From the port of Massawa in present-day Eritrea, the virus exploded
so fast that it reached South Africa within a decade (and is
considered one of the factors that impoverished Boer farmers as war
with the English approached). It doomed East Africa's wandering
herders, subsisting on milk mixed with cow blood. Historians believe a
third of them or more starved to death.

The disease was still leaping water barriers as late as the 1980s,
when Indian peacekeepers in Sri Lanka imported sick goats. Until 1999,
war-torn Sri Lanka was one of the world's last pockets of rinderpest.


As rinderpest advanced and receded over the centuries, it led to some
important scientific advances.

In 1713, when it threatened the papal herds, Pope Clement XI asked
his personal physician, Dr. Giovanni Maria Lancisi, to stop it. Dr.
Lancisi was familiar with the work of Dr. Bernardino Ramazzini, a
scholar at the University of Padua who accurately deduced that
rinderpest spread by the "virulently poisoned breath of an ox" and its
excretions and hide -- not by fogs, astrology or other popular
theories.

According to Dr. Scott, Dr. Lancisi prescribed quarantine measures
that were nearly as brutal to humans as to cattle.

Charlatan "cures" were banned; priests were ordered to stop relying
on prayer alone and to preach from the pulpit that all herds with any
sick members were to be slaughtered and buried in lime, while healthy
herds were to be kept isolated. Any layman who resisted or cheated was
to be hanged, drawn and quartered. Any disobeying priest was to be
sent to the galleys for life.

Within 9 months, the outbreak in the Papal States was snuffed. In the
rest of Europe -- where Protestants disdained papal orders -- it
persisted for a century and killed 200 million cattle.

By the 1750s, dairymen in England and the Netherlands were
experimenting with a crude early form of inoculation: soaking a cloth
in a diseased cow's mucus, then sewing it into a cut in a healthy cow.
It did not always protect, and sometimes killed.

(This was 50 years before Dr. Edward Jenner became famous for
preventing smallpox by vaccinating a boy with pus from a milkmaid's
cowpox blister. But Dr. Jenner was not the 1st; he got the credit
because he successfully repeated the vaccination 23 times and
published his results.)

In 1761, the 1st school of veterinary medicine was founded in Lyon,
France, specifically to fight rinderpest.

In 1924, a new and devastating European outbreak was the impetus for
creating the World Organization for Animal Health [OIE], the
veterinary equivalent of the World Health Organization. In that
decade, the new Soviet Union finally realized the old czarist goal of
eradicating rinderpest among steppe cattle.

Under Mao, China followed in the 1950s, relying on quarantine and
slaughter measures like Dr. Lancisi's (except that uncooperative
farmers were only imprisoned).

India, however, struggled until 1995.

"You can't slaughter cows in India," said Dr. William P. Taylor, a
rinderpest expert and technical adviser to that nation. But India did
so well at vaccination that near the end it became a problem for
global surveillance because health officials were reluctant to stop
long enough to prove the disease was gone. (Vaccinated animals test
positive despite their immunity.)

The intractable problem was Africa. The disease was in 32 countries
there, and many had pastoralist tribes like the Fulani, Masai, Dinka
and Afar, who lived on the borderless fringes and drove cattle up to
50 miles a day, having virtually no contact with governments and
getting no veterinary bulletins.

"In the '60s and '70s, the biggest problem we had was to convince
farmers to bring in their animals," said Dr. Protus Atang, a former
director of the African Union's veterinary institute. "They believed
vaccination brought disease."

Others had a traditional prevention method -- smearing feces from
infected animals in the mouths of healthy ones.

Just reaching them was hard. Land Rovers broke down, gasoline and
cash ran short. Vaccine was packaged with salt so it could be
dissolved in saline, but in remote areas salt was so valuable that it
would be stolen.

Announcing vaccination days "was advertising to rustlers where the
herds would be that day," said John Anderson, former chief of
laboratory testing for the eradication drive. African veterinary
officers were paid so poorly that they survived only through 2nd jobs
like breeding chickens or mending watches.

Despite all the drawbacks, by 1979 the effort looked successful, and
was ended. By the mid-'80s, rinderpest returned.

"I think they just stopped too early to celebrate," Dr. Anderson
said. "No one's exactly sure where it came back from."

Smallpox eradication boosted morale, Dr. Atang said, and a 2nd effort
was mounted in 1986, followed by a 3rd in 1998.

A crucial advance was a new vaccine that survived a month without
refrigeration. That let herders who could be recruited do their own
vaccinating. An education campaign using comic books, flip charts and
lecturers who spoke local languages was begun.

"The way we previously did it was really mindless," said Dr. Peter L.
Roeder, who directed the final eradication drive after working on the
2 earlier ones. "We'd get up before dawn to drive long distances. We'd
be wrestling the animals to the ground, it'd get stinking hot, and
pretty soon the locals would get fed up and walk away."

The cattle were nervous and hard to handle, and no wonder, he said:
They lived day and night with their owners and now were being roped
and tackled by white men wearing khaki and reeking of unfamiliar soaps
and deodorants.

"But someone local, dressed as a local, with mutton fat rubbed in his
hair, could walk among them and stick in a needle and barely be
noticed," Dr. Roeder said. "We'd be lucky to get 20 percent immunity
in a herd; our local guys could get 90, 95 percent."

His "Paul on the road to Damascus moment" he said, took place in
1991, as Ethiopia's civil war ended and he could finally drive north.


"We were driving up the edge of the Rift Valley, dropping down into
the bottom to meet the Afar people," Dr. Roeder said, "and almost
everywhere we found rinderpest and people crying out for vaccination.


"Later, sitting in a bar drinking smuggled Peroni beer, it came to
us: It wasn't necessary to constantly be doing mass vaccinations. We
were trying to get 30 million cattle and never getting more than 9
million. We needed to concentrate on these lowland areas where the
virus was persistent. We could vaccinate 2 million and do better."

While the upland had large, visible outbreaks, he explained, between
them the virus lurked in the lowland herds as it had centuries before
in steppe oxen. Since the older animals were all survivors and the
1-year-olds were protected by maternal antibodies, he reasoned, only
the 2- to 3-year-olds were vulnerable, and their age could be
estimated by looking at their teeth. If all members of that group were
vaccinated, the virus would slowly disappear.

A later crucial development was the rapid diagnostic test.

In the same way presidents denied that their citizens had AIDS, they
denied that their citizens' cattle had rinderpest. Dr. Roeder said he
once loaded a dead cow onto his pickup and drove it to the capital to
insist it be tested. (He declined to name the country.)

The new tests, similar to pregnancy kits, but using an eye swab
instead of urine, empowered local veterinary officials, said Dr.
Anderson, their inventor. Officials in the capital could no longer
just dismiss reports as misdiagnoses.

Even though the last known case was in 2001, officials waited 10
years to declare success, since surveillance is harder with animal
diseases. Even in Somalia, where the last smallpox case was found, a
dying child would be rushed to a hospital. A dying cow would just be
left behind.

The whole campaign, from 1945 to the present, cost about USD 5
billion, the United Nations has estimated.

"At first I thought, that's quite a lot," Dr. Roeder said. "Then I
thought, that last royal wedding cost USD 8 billion. This was cheap."


[Byline: Donald G. McNeil Jr.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The final adoption of the declaration by the FAO was preceded by
Resolution Number 18, titled "Declaration of Global Eradication of
Rinderpest and Implementation of Follow-up Measures to Maintain World
Freedom from Rinderpest," adopted on 25 May 2011 by the World Assembly
of Delegates of the OIE, Paris. (see
http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Media_Center/docs/pdf/RESO_18_EN.pdf).

Both organisations based their decisions on the conclusions and
recommendations of the Joint FAO/OIE Committee on Global Rinderpest
Eradication in its final report, May 2011. The report is available at

http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Media_Center/docs/pdf/Final_Report_May2011.pdf.
- Mod.AS]
See Also
Rinderpest - worldwide (02): global eradication, urgent RFI 20110526.1604
Rinderpest - worldwide: global eradication 20110526.1603
2010
----
Rinderpest - worldwide: on brink of extinction 20101016.3745
.................................................mhj/arn/ejp/jw
</body>
