<header id=048859>
Published Date: 2015-05-17 16:16:58 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Poisoning, diet pills - UK ex China: fatal
Archive Number: 20150517.3368465
</header>
<body id=048859>
POISONING, DIET PILLS - UK ex CHINA: FATAL
********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 13 May 2015
Source: DailyMail.co.uk [edited]
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3078573/They-no-better-cocaine-pushers-DNP-victim-Eloise-Parry-mum-s-fury-MailOnline-exposes-unscrupulous-Chinese-factories-selling-deadly-diet-pills-burned-daughter-inside.html


No better than cocaine pushers, unscrupulous Chinese factories are selling toxic DNP diet pills that have killed 6 Britons and 60 worldwide by "burning them to death from inside."

Firms in China agreed to sell vast quantities of the potentially fatal drug to undercover reporters posing as businessmen planning to sell the chemical to help people to lose weight in the UK. They even advised on how to smuggle the dangerous chemical into Britain by offering to disguise the packaging and change its name to get it past Customs officials.

Police are still investigating where a 21-year-old female victim bought the diet pills which killed her. She died in April 2015 after she took 8 pills, 6 more than the fatal dose.

The Zhengzhou PanPan Chemical Co Ltd offered to sell MailOnline investigators DNP as a slimming aid for human consumption, which is illegal in the UK. They also offered to disguise drugs in misleading packaging to get them past Customs.

The Beijing Herbal Health Biotech Limited Liability Company offered to sell us DNP for human consumption. The salesman was told we were importing it to Britain as a slimming pill and struck a deal to sell 30kg for USD 840.

The poisonous drug, DNP or 2,4-Dinitrophenol, which can cause the body to overheat leading to hyperthermia and burns users' insides, is widely used as an explosive and an agricultural pesticide. But it is also repackaged into easy-to-swallow capsules and sold illegally on the internet as aggressive "fat burner" weight-loss tablets, alongside claims that it can help users shed "a pound a day" without dieting.

"We are never going to be able to stop this stuff being put on sale, but at least we can alert people to the dangers," she said (the victim's mother). Interpol last week issued a global warning about the odourless powder, which has killed 60 people worldwide amid growing concern about the illegal sale of the chemical as a diet drug.

Issued at the request of the French Ministry of the Interior's Central Office for the Protection of the Environment and Public Health, Interpol's Orange Notice' alert -- which was circulated to all 190 member countries -- was made to raise public awareness following the death of E. and the case of a French man left "seriously ill" after taking the substance.

But, despite the warning, a MailOnline investigation has found hundreds of firms selling DNP, with 2 websites in China specifically advertising it as a weight loss drug.

Both companies we approached were willing to flout the law and sell the toxic chemical in the full knowledge that we planned to put it into capsules and sell it as a slimming aid. And both even offered to do the transaction through a middleman who would disguise the powder as something else to get the powder past the authorities.

Beijing Herbal Health Biotech Limited Liability Company advertises a number of potentially harmful weight loss products, including DNP. A salesman boasted his Beijing-based company already exports it to the USA, Europe and "probably" the UK.

When the salesman was told that we wanted to put the powder into capsules and sell it as a slimming aid for human consumption, he confirmed he was happy to take the order. Admitting he had "no idea" about British regulations, he was then asked about recommended dosage.

Washing his hands of all responsibility, he replied: "I don't know so much about this, either. But usually the capsule comes as 2 forms: 300mg and 500mg. You will decide how much you want to fill and whether you fill only DNP or other elements as well."

He agreed to sell our reporter 30kg of the powder for USD 28 a kg in a deal worth USD 840. The DNP would be delivered in just 12 days, it was agreed.

A 2nd company, Zhengzhou Panpan Company, based in the Henan Province, China, also offered to fraudulently alter the product's export license to smuggle it into the UK. Negotiating a deal for 30kg of DNP, sales manager Nancy Hu claimed that "the material is risky," and suggested that should we do "everything by the book," [or] she couldn't do business with us.

Ms Hu went on: "We should be very careful, especially with the powder products, and we need to change the name if (shipped) by air. We transfer the goods to the forwarder but 1st need to get all the documents ready. We change the name and show them required documents. The forwarder is only in charge of delivery. The customers in the foreign country should cooperate when receiving the goods there, like they sometimes need to bring their invoice, and they can't say, 'oh, these products are not what I have asked for,'" she added.

Ms Hu offered us a discount on an order over 20kg and promised delivery to the UK within 20 days. But she reacted angrily when we later revealed that we were investigating the illegal export of deadly DNP for human consumption. Initially she denied selling at all despite it being advertised on the website, telling MailOnline: "We don't have DNP. My company doesn't sell DNP. We don't call it DNP. Moreover, we only sell it as fertilizer. I don't need to explain," she added, before hanging up the phone.

A Beijing Herbal Health Biotech Limited spokesman also said: "If clients want to buy the product from us, we as their supplier don't necessarily know what they will use if for. We don't focus on having to check [the] client's intention. DNP is not a dangerous product. Whether or not it's dangerous depends on how the consumer uses it. We will tell clients how much they should use. If the quantity is small, then there is no danger."

But the bereaved parents of 6 Britons who watched their children die from taking DNP last night reacted with fury that the killer drug is so widely available, and recklessly sold, despite regulation.

"It does not come as a surprise that companies in China are prepared to sell DNP as a slimming product. For them to say 'it's not my problem' is totally immoral. They are drug dealers. They are no better than cocaine manufacturers," the female victim's mother said.

The mother found the drug in her daughter's handbag after her death in hospital on 12 Apr 2015.

She said it was sent in a "nondescript" plastic bag labelled with a white sticker embossed with the letters DNP and an illustration of its chemical formula. The female victim bought her capsules over the Internet, but her mother does not know the identity of the supplier.

She added: "The police are looking into where my daughter bought the tablets." The female victim's mother was joined by a 2nd mother who lost her 18-year-old son, a talented 6th form rugby player who died after taking it in September 2013.

This male victim had just completed his A-levels at the GBP 15 000-a-year Hampton School in West London and was planning on studying a business degree at university. His mother told MailOnline: "We lost our son nearly 2 years ago, and it has been devastating. It's appalling that companies and unscrupulous people think that they are able to get away with this. The way they sell it through websites which are closed down and then opened up again is completely immoral."

DNP, a yellow organic compound, is used to suppress plant growth and as an explosive. 1st used in the manufacture of ammunition during World War I, it was launched as a slimming aid in 1933 when scientists discovered that it raised a person's metabolic rate. But it was banned in 1938 due to severe side effects including heart attacks and death.

Symptoms include fever, dehydration, nausea, vomiting, restlessness, flushed skin, excessive sweating, dizziness, headaches, rapid breathing and rapid and irregular heartbeat. The drug has also been linked to cancer, cataracts, heart and nerve damage, and an increased risk of birth defects in children.

Despite this, the odourless powder has become increasingly popular, especially among pressured young people concerned about their physical appearance and body builders.

A 23-year-old female Leeds University student died after secretly taking DNP along with a prescribed anti-depressant. She was studying to be a doctor. She had struggled with anorexia and bulimia since she was 14. The night before she died, she took cold showers to try to cool down. She was found dead in her bedroom by a flatmate the day after refusing to call an ambulance when she felt hot and unwell.

Another male, 28, died after he drank a dissolved sachet of DNP as part of a fitness and weight loss plan. The body-builder from Buckinghamshire could not stop sweating and was rushed to hospital when he started to struggle to breathe. His temperature soared to 42 C [107 F] -- well above the average body temperature of 37C [98.6 F] -- and he died in October 2012.

The 28-year-old's mother said: "If people are selling DNP in bulk, there is only one reason, and that is as a slimming aid. It's immoral and wrong. It's disgusting." His mother said: "I think it should be made illegal to put a fertilizer into a tablet and sell it as diet pills; it's a killer."

His mother continued: "How can anybody sell these products as a dietary aid after the deaths of my son and all the other young people? And to hear that this company is prepared to help forge documents to smuggle this stuff into the country is disgraceful. They are no better than drug dealers."

There are many others with similar stories.

The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority [MHRA] in the UK has no power to prevent its use as a drug because it is not a pharmaceutical. Theoretically, the Food Standards Agency (FSA) can take action if DNP is sold for human consumption. But lax laws mean the British market is wide open to predatory DNP factories based in China, only a click away from selling the toxic pills on the Internet for as little 70 cents each.

Obesity expert Dr Sally Norton warned young people not to be tempted by the deadly drug. She said: "Buying diet-pills on the Internet means you have no idea what they really contain and whether they could interact with drugs you may already be taking or make an existing health problem worse. DNP is a toxic chemical declared unfit for human consumption by the Food Standards Agency. Ingesting this poison can lead to nausea, vomiting, restlessness, flushed skin, sweating, dizziness, headaches, rapid respiration and irregular heart-beat, possibly leading to coma and death. Despite this, it appears that these drugs are being made in clandestine laboratories before being marketed to vulnerable people, desperate for that miracle solution to their often largely imaginary weight problem. So, don't play with your health. Yes, being overweight may be a risk, but don't swap that risk for a diet-pill that may be a lot worse for you and probably doesn't work anyway. And, as soon as that miracle diet-pill that actually leads to safe and significant weight-loss becomes available, you will be the 1st to know."

[Byline: Nick Fagge, Jamie Fullerton and Cissy Young]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[DNP is often found as bright yellow pills or capsules. Bright yellow DNP powder is produced as a pesticide at chemical factories in Turkey and China. It is then made into easy-to-swallow capsules by dealers who sell them online as weight-loss pills.

2,4-Dinitrophenol (DNP) is reported to cause rapid loss of weight, but unfortunately is associated with an unacceptably high rate of significant adverse effects. DNP is sold mostly over the Internet under a number of different names as a weight loss/slimming aid. It causes uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation; the classic symptom complex associated with toxicity of phenol-based products such as DNP is a combination of hyperthermia, tachycardia, diaphoresis and tachypnoea, eventually leading to death. Fatalities related to exposure to DNP have been reported since [1918 from occupational exposure]. To date, there have been 62 published deaths in the medical literature attributed to DNP.

This number is likely to climb, and the obsession with slim bodies, idolized in movies, places perceived pressures on some people to pursue any means to loose weight. However, this article and research into DNP's affects on the body show clearly that they include extreme heat, essentially cooking one's body from the inside out. While there is a boost in metabolic rate generally associated with weight loss, it is also a fatal fire raging on the inside of the body for which there is no treatment. Consuming small amounts over longer periods can lead to cataracts, skin lesions and affect the heart, blood and nervous system.

Prior to access by unscrupulous businesses, DNP was outlawed in many countries because it caused death in unsuspecting dieters.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3550200/. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3368465,40.]
See Also
2013
----
Dietary supplement, hepatic toxicity - USA: (HI) recall: 20131009.1991563
.................................................sb/tg/msp/jw
</body>
