<header id=055059>
Published Date: 2014-12-05 05:09:43 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Antibiotic resistance - India (02)
Archive Number: 20141205.3012828
</header>
<body id=055059>
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE - INDIA (02)
*************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 3 Dec 2014
Source: The New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/04/world/asia/superbugs-kill-indias-babies-and-pose-an-overseas-threat.html


A deadly epidemic that could have global implications is quietly sweeping India, and among its many victims are tens of thousands of newborns dying because once-miraculous cures no longer work.

These infants are born with bacterial infections that are resistant to most known antibiotics, and more than 58 000 died last year [2013] as a result, a recent study found. While that is still a fraction of the nearly 800 000 newborns who die annually in India, Indian pediatricians say that the rising toll of resistant infections could soon swamp efforts to improve India's abysmal infant death rate. Nearly a third of the world's newborn deaths occur in India.

"Reducing newborn deaths in India is one of the most important public health priorities in the world, and this will require treating an increasing number of neonates who have sepsis and pneumonia," said Dr Vinod Paul, chief of pediatrics at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and the leader of the study. "But if resistant infections keep growing, that progress could slow, stop, or even reverse itself. And that would be a disaster for not only India but the entire world."

In visits to neonatal intensive care wards in 5 Indian states, doctors reported being overwhelmed by such cases. "5 years ago, we almost never saw these kinds of infections," said Dr Neelam Kler, chairwoman of the department of neonatology at New Delhi's Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, one of India's most prestigious private hospitals. "Now, close to 100 percent of the babies referred to us have multidrug resistant infections. It's scary."

These babies are part of a disquieting outbreak. A growing chorus of researchers say the evidence is now overwhelming that a significant share of the bacteria present in India -- in its water, sewage, animals, soil, and even its mothers -- are immune [that is, resistant] to nearly all antibiotics.

Newborns are particularly vulnerable because their immune systems are fragile, leaving little time for doctors to find a drug that works. But everyone is at risk. Uppalapu Shrinivas, one of India's most famous musicians, died [19 Sep 2014] at age 45 because of an infection that doctors could not cure.

While far from alone in creating antibiotic resistance, India's resistant infections have already begun to migrate elsewhere. "India's dreadful sanitation, uncontrolled use of antibiotics, and overcrowding coupled with a complete lack of monitoring the problem has created a tsunami of antibiotic resistance that is reaching just about every country in the world," said Dr Timothy R Walsh, a professor of microbiology at Cardiff University. Indeed, researchers have already found "superbugs" carrying a genetic code first identified in India -- NDM1 (or New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase 1) -- around the world, including in France, Japan, Oman, and the United States.

Some studies have found that developing countries have bacterial rates of resistance to antibiotics that are far higher than those in developed nations, with India the global focal point. Bacteria spread easily in India, experts say, because half of Indians defecate outdoors, and much of the sewage generated by those who do use toilets is untreated. As a result, Indians have among the highest rates of bacterial infections in the world and collectively take more antibiotics, which are sold over the counter here, than any other nationality.

A recent study found that Indian children living in places where people are less likely to use a toilet tend to get diarrhea and be given antibiotics more often than those in places with more toilet use. On [2 Oct 2014], the Indian government began a campaign to clean the country and build toilets, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi publicly sweeping a Delhi neighborhood. But the task is monumental. "In the absence of better sanitation and hygiene, we are forced to rely heavily on antibiotics to reduce infections," said Ramanan Laxminarayan, vice president for research and policy at the Public Health Foundation of India. "The result is that we are losing these drugs, and our newborns are already facing the consequences of untreatable sepsis," or blood infections.

Some health experts and officials here say that these killer bugs are largely confined to hospitals, where heavy use of antibiotics leads to localized colonies. But India's top neonatologists suspect the large number of resistant infections in newborns in their 1st days of life demonstrates that these dangerous bacteria are thriving in communities and even pregnant women's bodies. "Our hypothesis is that resistant infections in newborns may be originating from the maternal genital tract and not just the environment," Dr Paul said in an interview.

In a continuing study in Delhi at several government-run hospitals that has so far included more than 12 000 high-risk newborns, and was made available to The New York Times, about 70 percent of the babies' infections were found to be immune [that is, resistant] to multiple powerful antibiotics, confirming the results of earlier and smaller studies.

Doctors interviewed in hospitals across India said that a large number of the infections they found in newborns were resistant to many antibiotics. Awareness of the problem has begun to grow, with Indian medical associations calling for efforts to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use. But there is keen sensitivity here to any alert to the dangers. A 2010 discovery of a New Delhi "superbug" caused intense controversy because of fears that publicity would threaten India's profitable medical tourism industry. Government officials have stopped some studies of the problem, Dr Walsh said.

The effects of antibiotic-resistant bacteria on treating disease in India could be enormous. Tuberculosis is just one example of the challenges doctors face. India has the world's largest number of cases, and recent studies using the latest genetic tests have shown that as many as 10 percent of untreated patients in places as far apart as Mumbai and Sikkim have resistant infections. These patients are catching resistant bugs at home, not hospitals, making the epidemic very difficult to control, Dr Soumya Swaminathan, director of the National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis, said in an interview. "It's startling and very worrying," Dr Swaminathan said. Unless the government makes profound and drastic changes, tuberculosis in India may soon become untreatable, she said.

Although resistant bugs are everywhere here, hospitals have become factories for untreatable "superbugs." A government program that pays women to have babies in hospitals has in 10 years more than doubled the share of hospital-born babies to 82 percent, but the government did little to increase hospital capacity to deal with the crush. Maternity wards often have 2 and 3 women in each bed, allowing infections to spread rapidly.

Besides being desperately crowded, many hospitals are unhygienic, allowing the bugs to flourish. A UNICEF survey of 94 district hospitals and health centers in Rajasthan last year [2013] found that 70 percent had possibly contaminated water and 78 percent had no soap available at hand-washing sinks, while 67 percent of toilets were unsanitary.

Doctors across India have responded to the sanitation crisis in hospitals by giving antibiotics freely. In Haryana, for instance, almost every baby born in hospitals in recent years was injected with antibiotics whether they showed signs of illness or not, Dr Suresh Dalpat, deputy director of child health in the state of Haryana, said in an interview. "Now, with proper training, we are bringing that down." All those drugs create resistant bacteria that find their way into hospital sewage, which is mostly dumped untreated into rivers, canals, and pits in the surrounding community where pregnant women can become infected.

The most frequent causes of resistant newborn infections in India are bacteria like _Klebsiella_ and _Acinetobacter_, which are found in untreated human waste. Such bacteria rarely infect newborns in developed nations, said Dr Paul.

India and other developing nations are by no means alone in threatening the future of antibiotics. Overuse of the drugs in chicken, hog, and cattle farms in the United States has led to the rise of resistant strains there, and research has shown that as much as half of antibiotic prescriptions in the United States are unnecessary.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated last year [2013] that 2 million people are sickened by resistant bacteria every year in the United States and 23 000 die as a result. But efforts to crack down on inappropriate antibiotic use in the United States and much of Europe have been successful, with prescriptions dropping from 2000 to 2010. That drop was more than offset, however, by growing use in the developing world.

Global sales of antibiotics for human consumption rose 36 percent from 2000 to 2010, with Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa accounting for 76 percent of that increase. In India, much of that growth has been driven by private doctors who deliver about 90 percent of care there and are often poorly trained. Much of these doctors' income comes from drug sales.

Just as worrisome has been the rapid growth of India's industrialized animal husbandry, where antibiotics are widespread. Most large chicken farms use feed laced with antibiotics banned for use in animals in the United States. A New Delhi science group recently found antibiotic residues in 40 percent of chicken samples tested.

[Byline: Gardiner Harris]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The news report above paints a very grim picture of antibiotic overuse and its consequences in India. The news report says that antibiotic overuse in India is driven by private doctors who deliver about 90 percent of care and who are often poorly trained. Apparently these physicians in India can prescribe, as well as dispense antibiotics, profiting from their selling antibiotics for which they have written prescriptions. In addition, pharmacists dispense antibiotics over-the-counter in India, without a physician's prescription (http://www.reactgroup.org/news/332/18.html). Antibiotic overuse is also occurring in India's rapidly growing industrialized animal husbandry.

Much of this antibiotic usage is for inappropriate indications, which needlessly causes intestinal bacteria exposed to antibiotics to become resistant. These resistant intestinal bacteria end up in human fecal waste that is then spread in the environment because half of Indians defecate outdoors and much of the sewage generated by those who do use toilets is untreated, contaminating surface water (creeks, lakes, and streams) and ground water to eventually end up in the drinking water.

India is also a large producer of the world's supply of generic antibiotics, which has led to environmental contamination by these drugs. A study found high levels of antibiotics downstream from a waste-water treatment plant that received effluent water from 90 Indian drug production facilities near Hyderabad, India -- much higher levels than levels measured in waters that receive sewage effluent in the USA. In addition, high levels of antibiotics were found both in well water that was used for drinking by local villagers and in lakes that did not take in wastewater from the sewage plant, suggesting that drug contamination of surface, ground, and drinking water was more generalized (Fick J, Soederstroem H, Lindberg RH, et al: Contamination of surface, ground, and drinking water from pharmaceutical production. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2009; 28(12): 2522-7. doi: 10.1897/09-073.1; available at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1897/09-073.1/full).

Antibiotic resistance is thus not restricted just to hospitals in India, but is circulating widely in the community, and its causes are not restricted just to overuse of antibiotics by physicians or pharmacists who dispense antibiotics without valid prescriptions. Its causes are complex and will require wide-ranging efforts to control. - Mod.ML

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3012828,142.]
See Also
NDM-4 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - India: (UP) hospital sewage 20140905.2749919
Antibiotic resistance - India 20140505.2449567
2013
----
Salmonellosis, st. Paratyphi A - Japan: ex India, multidrug resistance 20131117.2057055
Bacterioides fragilis - USA: (WA) ex India susp, multidrug resistance 20130830.1912302
Campylobacteriosis - India, Canada: drug resistance 20130717.1827916
2012
----
NDM-1 carrying Vibrio cholerae - India 20120801.1224333
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - Ireland: 1st rep, ex India 20120217.1044861
2011
----
Antibiotic resistance, Salmonella typhi - India (02): (Mumbai) fluoroquinolones 20111105.3296
Antibiotic resistance, Salmonella typhi - India: (Mumbai) fluoroquinolones 20111031.3235
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - India: (New Delhi) water supply 20110411.1145
.................................................mpp/ml/mj/mpp
</body>
