<header id=044338>
Published Date: 2011-07-28 07:57:47 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Hendra virus, equine - Australia (19): (QLD) canine
Archive Number: 20110728.2267
</header>
<body id=044338>
HENDRA VIRUS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA (19): (QUEENSLAND) CANINE
**********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 27 Jul 2011
From: David Thomson <thomson.david48@gmail.com> [edited]


[Re: ProMED-mail Hendra virus, equine - Australia (18): (QL) canine 20110727.2257]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
>From the 1st authoritative article in the post, it seems that the
latest positive test of the dog was an antibody test, whereas the
former 2 negative tests were antigen tests -- suggesting that the dog
has been exposed to the virus, the virus has likely replicated
somewhere in the dog's tissues to stimulate an immune response, but
that virus excretion was not sufficient (at the time of antigen
testing) to generate positive antigen tests.

Much can be learned by keeping the exposed dog alive, contained, and
under close extended observation and study. Much can also be learned
by very detailed post mortem pathological investigation of tissues
derived from the exposed dog. The pertinent question is which is the
more appropriate course of action at this time.

It is known that Hendra virus is capable of localizing and being
retained chronically in CNS tissues of susceptible hosts (humans
particularly, but probably also horses). This phenomenon is also a
characteristic of some other somewhat related viruses such as canine
distemper virus and human measles virus. It is not yet known, however,
whether or not cases with retained virus in their CNS can recrudesce
to overt excretion of virus at some later time, thereby posing a
potential transmission risk.

It may therefore be prudent for risk assessment purposes to determine
of the exposed dog has any evidence of latent virus hiding in any of
its tissues, including the CNS. That is rather difficult to achieve
effectively without very detailed and comprehensive post-mortem
examination, least of all in a humane way for the dog under study. If
there then appears to be no evidence of retained virus in this dog,
then it may then be appropriate to try to maintain any further dog
cases under containment and observation long term to see if there is
potential for recrudescence and virus excretion based on the premise
that that risk is likely very low.

The particular dog in question is an outdoors farm-raised, very
active, working breed that may not tolerate confinement and
containment for long term study well. In addition long term study
procedures and requirements may present additional threats to the
dog's well-being that need to be considered. It may be more
appropriate on animal welfare grounds to try to replicate infection in
dogs using laboratory adapted animals, rather than try to use this
particular dog.

With regard to dog challenge assessment, it is also my understanding
that initial virus challenge experiments in dogs involved injection of
Hendra virus into 2 dogs (a low number, but balanced by the need to
limit the extent of animal experimentation as much as possible when
potential consequences of exposure for the experimental subjects are
initially unknown). It may be more appropriate now to challenge more
dogs, including by other routes of exposure, such as, intra-nasal,
oral, and intra-ocular to more closely mimic likely natural mechanisms
of exposure.

--
David Thomson
<thomson.david48@gmail.com>

[From the OIE website
(http://web.oie.int/wahis/public.php?page=single_report&pop=1&reportid=10833:
This case in a dog is the 1st report of a dog testing positive for
Hendra virus exposure outside a laboratory. The dog has not had a
reported recent illness. It is most likely that the dog contracted the
infection from one of 3 horses on this property that have died from
Hendra between mid-June and early July 2011. All dogs are tested where
they have had possible exposure to infected horses. National policy is
that domesticated animals that have evidence of infection with Hendra
virus, even if they are not ill, are euthanised because of the
potential risk they may pose to people.

The route of infection between bats and horses is believed to be via
bat bodily fluids, including saliva, urine, and birthing fluids
contaminating horse feed or water. The virus rarely spreads between
horses. There is no evidence of the virus being transmitted directly
from the flying fox to humans.

Diagnostic test results
Species: dogs
Test: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Test date: 25 Jul 2011
Result: positive

Species: dogs
Test: polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Test date: 4 Jul 2011
Result: negative

Species: dogs
Test: polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Test date: 25 Jul 2011
Result: negative

Species: dogs
Test: virus neutralisation test (VNT)
Test Date: 25 Jul 2011
Result: positive

Nevertheless, I question the validity of the test as they have not
acknowledged having positive canines before. - Mod.TG]

******
[2]
Date: Wed 27 Jul 2011
Source: The Australian [edited]
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/dogs-case-of-hendra-worsens-worries-over-spreading-virus/story-e6frg6nf-1226102334678


Dog's case of Hendra worsens worries over spreading virus
---------------------------------------------------------
Hendra virus has unexpectedly jumped to dogs, with confirmation a
family pet has been infected on a property near Brisbane that was
already quarantined. The male kelpie was found to be carrying
antibodies to the potentially fatal bat-borne disease, heightening an
emergency that stretches from Cairns to the New South Wales north
coast town of Coffs Harbour and inland to Chinchilla, 300 km [186 mi]
west of Brisbane.

Laboratory tests had shown cats, pigs, and ferrets were capable of
contracting and transmitting the virus but horses and people had been
the only known casualties so far.

Flying foxes carry the disease without succumbing to it.

Queensland chief vet Rick Symons said: "This is the 1st time outside
of a laboratory that an animal other than a flying fox, or a horse, or
a human has been confirmed with Hendra virus infection."

The dog was not infectious but the presence of antibodies, picked up
in routine screening after 2 horses died at the Mount Alford property,
80 km [50 mi] south of Brisbane, showed it had been exposed. Dr Symons
said it had probably been infected by the sick horses rather than by
bats.

The dog's owners, who have 2 children, are reluctant to have the
kelpie put down. It shows no sign of illness and is still on the
property with their 2 other dogs. They did not return calls yesterday
[26 Jul 2011]. "This is a family pet ... a part of the family," Dr
Symons said. "It's really hard on them, they're having some time to
come to terms with this."

He said biosecurity policy, applied nationally, was to euthanise all
animals found to have contracted the virus due to its capacity to
become active after a period of dormancy in the host. "Therefore
leaving it alive is really putting people at risk," Dr Symons said.

Queensland Premier Anna Bligh said the development was "very
worrying". She has convened an emergency meeting of NSW and Queensland
biosecurity authorities today to review the ongoing crisis.

"We need to understand better what is happening with this disease," Ms
Bligh said. "It is relatively unknown and despite the scientific
effort to date there are developments I think are very worrying."

The Premier said the Queensland government would continue to resist
calls to cull flying foxes.

This year's [2011] Hendra season is the worst on record, with 8
separate outbreaks in Queensland and 3 in NSW. 14 horses have died
from it or been put down and at least 90 are under quarantine at
outbreak sites in both states. Dozens of people are being monitored
for symptoms as well. Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young
said there was minimal infection risk from the dog to the family, who
were continuing their infection-screening process.

She said it was unknown whether dogs could transmit Hendra to humans
but acknowledged that was "something we have to look at very
carefully. This . . . has changed our knowledge very significantly,"
she said. "It's the 1st time that another species has been infected so
we do need to work that through."

[Byline: Jamie Walker, Rosanne Barrett]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[While this article does not shed much information, it shows some
humanity toward the family and their pet. However, it is almost
contradictory. If Queensland Biosecurity is resisting calls to cull
flying foxes, then they should reconsider the issues with this dog. -
Mod.TG]

******
[3]
Date: Wed 27 Jul 2011
Source: ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) [edited]
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-07-27/family-angry-about-euthanising-hendra-dog/2812366


A family at the centre of a Hendra virus outbreak in south-east
Queensland is angry their pet dog has to be put down. 14 infected
horses have died or been euthanised across Queensland and New South
Wales in the last month.

Authorities from both states held a crisis meeting in Brisbane today
[27 Jul 2011] to discuss the deadly Hendra virus's appearance in a
dog. Yesterday it was confirmed a pet kelpie from a property at Mount
Alford, south-west of Brisbane, tested positive to the disease.

It was the 1st time Hendra virus had been found in a species other
than a bat, horse, or human, outside a controlled laboratory
experiment. So far in this latest outbreak, no human has contracted
the disease.

The virus is spread by flying foxes.

The dog owner says he was unaware when he agreed to have the family's
3 dogs tested for Hendra virus that it would be compulsory to
euthanise any that tested positive. Their dog returned a positive
result, but is not showing signs of illness. The family is now waiting
on a 3rd test result.

The owner says he has already lost 3 horses to Hendra virus in the
last month and now he is worried about another horse. "I have concerns
for one in particular -- we're still waiting on those results to come
back -- hopefully we'll have them back today," he said.

The owner says he has not noticed any flying fox activity on the
family's Mount Alford property since the removal of banana plants 6
years ago. [Any fig trees around? - Mod.TG]

However, Queensland's chief vet Dr Rick Symons says the dog most
likely caught the virus from a sick horse and not directly from a
flying fox. [The horses had to get it from somewhere? - Mod.TG]

Dr Symons says the dog will likely be put down as a precaution. "As a
result of that infection, it may make it aggressive," he said. "That
makes it quite potentially a dangerous dog."

Dr Martyn Jeggo, director of the Australian Animal Health Laboratory,
agrees the dog is unlikely to have been infected from a flying fox.
"When the horse is sick we do know this virus in their secretions --
the nasal secretions -- the horse was recumbent and was fairly sick
and was discharging," Dr Jeggo said. "If the dog had been in contact
with that horse, it could have been in contact with high levels of
virus from those secretions."

Dr Jeggo also says wild dogs are unlikely to come into contact with
the virus. "I think the likelihood of those wild dogs being in contact
with the sick horses is extremely unlikely," he said.

"As I keep saying, we have tested plenty of other dogs to demonstrate
that this thing is not widespread around Australia."

Research funding
----------------
Meanwhile, Queensland Premier Anna Bligh announced a 4-fold increase
in funding for research into the virus this morning. Ms Bligh says the
Queensland and NSW governments will boost research funding by AUD 6
million [USD 6.62 million] over the next 3 years.

The 2 states will each contribute an extra AUD 3 million [USD 3.3
million] over 3 years to increase research into Hendra virus.

It will look into the disease's behaviour, the interaction between
horses and flying foxes, environmental factors and the susceptibility
of other species.

"The research effort that we are now funding will be going directly to
the questions about how the virus is spreading, why are we seeing such
a spike," Ms Bligh said. "The recent spike that is much more
significant than anything we've seen to date, plus the confirmation of
this virus now in another species, means that we need to accelerate
that research effort.

"[We need] to give the funds necessary for scientists to take these
research efforts into areas that they previously haven't been able to.
This allocation of a further AUD 6 million in that period will more
than quadruple the research effort."

Queensland authorities admit they are concerned at a new twist in the
spread of Hendra virus, but insist they have the situation under
control.

Hendra virus has now been detected on properties from Kuranda, west of
Cairns in far north Queensland, to Macksville on the New South Wales
coast.

Liberal National Party (LNP) leader Campbell Newman says flying foxes
should be moved away from residential areas and vegetation should then
be removed if necessary. "Just outside of these towns there are plenty
of places and we're simply advocating a humane movement of the bats to
other locations and getting then out of the towns, out of people's
backyards," he said.

Mr Newman says more research should have been done in the past. "I
hesitate a bit to say this because this is a bit of a crisis now, but
I do point out that the Government should have been dealing with this
matter several years ago," he said.

"This is not the 1st time that Hendra has reared its head and there
should have been some serious work on this very worrying disease back
then."

[Byline: Andree Withey, Kerrin Binnie, Emma Pollard, Melinda Howells]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Let's hope the research is well directed so that the government is
not just throwing money at research. Often in a crisis things get
funded without the desired outcome being spelled out clearly.

If the veterinarians testing the dog did not clearly explain the
ramifications of allowing the dogs to be tested then the Biosecurity
veterinarians are likely at fault and there should be strong
reconsiderations to any policy requiring euthanasia. This family has
suffered plenty of heartache and losses without adding this to it. -
Mod.TG]

******
[4]
Date: Tue 26 Jul 2011
Source: Brisbane Times [edited]
http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/environment/animals/factbox-the-latest-hendra-outbreak-20110726-1hya6.html


Facts about the most recent cases of the Hendra virus in Queensland
and NSW:
- 14 horses infected with Hendra have died or been put down since 20
Jun 2011; 10 in Queensland and 4 in NSW.
- Cases have spanned from west of Cairns, in north Queensland, to
Macksville on the NSW mid-north coast and west to Chinchilla on
Queensland's western Darling Downs.
- More than 57 people are believed to have been exposed to
Hendra-infected horses in Queensland and NSW. All are now undergoing
tests.
- Dozens of horses on affected properties are also being tested.

Outbreaks since 20 Jun 2011:
- Mount Alford, southwest of Boonah, in southern Queensland. 3
Hendra-infected horses die, the 1st on 20 Jun 2011, the 2nd on 1 Jul
2011, and the 3rd on 4 Jul 2011.
- Kerry, south of Beaudesert, in southern Queensland. A horse falls
ill with Hendra while on agistment. It's moved to nearby Biddaddaba,
where it dies on 26 Jun 2011.
- Wollongbar, east of Lismore, in northern NSW. A Hendra-infected
horse is put down on 30 Jun 2011. A 2nd horse is put down after
contracting Hendra on the same property. It is buried on 14 Jul 2011.
- Macksville, south of Coffs Harbour, on the NSW mid-north coast. A
Hendra-infected horse dies on 3 Jul 2011.
- Park Ridge, south of Brisbane, in southern Queensland. A
Hendra-infected horse dies on 4 Jul 2011.
- Near Kuranda, west of Cairns. A Hendra-infected horse at the Blazing
Saddles trail riding property dies on 11 Jul 2011.
- Hervey Bay, north of Brisbane. One Hendra-infected horse is put down
on 14 Jul 2011 and another horse at the same property is tested for
the virus.
- Boondall, in northern Brisbane. A horse is put down on 15 Jul 2011
at a hobby farm near the city's Doomben and Eagle Farm racing tracks
and is later confirmed to have contracted Hendra.
- Property near Lismore, in northern NSW. A horse suddenly dies on 15
Jul 2011 and samples are taken for testing. A positive Hendra result
is later confirmed.
- Logan property, south of Brisbane. A horse that died on 28 Jun 2011
is confirmed to have had Hendra. Tests show it had antibodies to the
virus. It's the 1st horse to have survived the virus and then die from
a relapse. Most horses die within days of contracting the virus or are
put down.
- Chinchilla, on the western Darling Downs. A sick horse shows signs
of Hendra and dies on 22 Jul 2011. Tests confirm the disease and 4
horses on the property are quarantined for testing.
- On 25 Jul 2011, a dog tested positive for Hendra virus for the 1st
time. Testing on a dog from the property at Mt Alford confirmed the
unprecedented presence of Hendra antibodies. The dog had earlier
returned 2 negative results for the virus but a different type of test
was conducted at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Comments are imbedded in the different pieces. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (18): (QL) canine 20110727.2257
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (17): (QLD, NSW) 20110725.2243
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (16): (QLD, NSW) 20110723.2220
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (15): (QL, NS) 20110717.2167
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (14): (QL, NSW) 20110716.2158
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (13): (QL) 20110715.2149
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (12): (QL,NS) 20110715.2137
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (11): (QL,NS) human exposure 20110714.2125
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (10): (QL,NS) human exposure 20110713.2110
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (09): (QL,NS) human exposure 20110712.2098
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (08): (QL,NS) 20110710.2084
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (07): (QL,NS) 20110706.2045
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (06): (QL,NS) human exposure 20110705.2036
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (05): (NSW) human exposure 20110702.2012
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (04): (QL) 20110701.1997
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (03): (QL) human exposure 20110630.1989
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (02): (QL) 20110629.1984
Hendra virus, equine - Australia: vaccine 20110525.1589
.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
