<header id=027697>
Published Date: 2019-09-28 14:16:13 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Obituary: Stuart B. Levy
Archive Number: 20190928.6696557
</header>
<body id=027697>
OBITUARY: STUART B. LEVY
************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 13 Sep 2019
Source: Tufts Now [edited]
https://now.tufts.edu/articles/remembering-stuart-levy


Remembering Stuart Levy
------------------------
Stuart B. Levy, the emeritus professor of molecular biology and microbiology at the Tufts University School of Medicine whose pioneering research and impassioned advocacy raised awareness of the danger of antibiotic resistance, died on [4 Sep 2019]. Levy, who had battled Parkinson's disease and related conditions for several years, was 80.

Colleagues, friends, and family remember the scientist, who retired in 2018 after 47 years at Tufts, as a gifted researcher and a compassionate and humble human being.

"Stuart was a rare combination," said John Leong, the Edith Rieva and Hyman S. Trilling Professor and chair of the Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology. "He had a far-reaching vision of the consequences of inappropriate use of antibiotics, a keen understanding of the need for public education and policy change, an ability to communicate effectively, and a cutting-edge lab that studied the mechanisms of bacterial resistance."

The son of a doctor who made house calls in Wilmington, Delaware, Levy grew up steeped in medicine and science. He, his identical twin brother Jay (the younger by 20 minutes), and sister Ellen all ended up pursuing careers in academic medicine.

Levy also had a lifelong interest in literature (he corresponded with Samuel Beckett), fine and performing arts (he occasionally enlivened meetings by playing the ukulele), and international cultures. An English major at Williams College, he told The Scientist in a 2015 interview that he loved the fact that he "could keep these interests and still go to medical school."

The twin brothers enjoyed switching identities, pulling off a particularly notable prank as undergraduates that is now part of family lore. After months of preparation, including determining that such a stunt would not result in disciplinary action, they successfully executed a week-long switch, with Jay attending classes at Williams while Stuart hung out at Wesleyan, his twin's university. More recently, at the 100th anniversary celebration of the American Society for Microbiology, of which Stuart was president, the brothers marched in identical attire on either side of a float. "Some people," Jay recalled, "wondered how Stuart could be in 2 places at once."

Levy enrolled in the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1960. While on leave as a visiting research fellow at the Institut Pasteur, he met noted Japanese scientist Tsutomu Watanabe, who introduced him to a breakthrough discovery: that resistance to antibiotics can transfer from one bacterium to another, even across species. "This was unheard of previously. It was the beginning of studies on transferrable drug-resistance genes and infectious drug resistance," Levy told The Scientist. It was also the beginning of his own professional path.

Antibiotics, which kill or stop the growth of bacteria, offered miraculous cures for once-deadly infections, and their use became widespread. But doctors soon saw that antibiotics were losing effectiveness, as bacteria were no longer succumbing to the drugs. At the time, scientists didn't understand the mechanisms of antibiotic resistance or the threat it posed. Today, scientists have reported bacteria that are resistant to all known antibiotics.

"People were talking about antibiotic resistance 50 years ago, but the miracle drug mentality was so pervasive that people ignored the warnings and demanded antibiotics for all kinds of things, like minor sore throats or colds, which are caused by viruses, not bacteria. It was a big problem for doctors and hospitals," said Harris Berman, dean of Tufts School of Medicine.

Levy joined the Tufts School of Medicine in 1971 as an assistant professor in the departments of medicine and microbiology. Five years later, he published a study in the New England Journal of Medicine showing chickens raised on feed containing low doses of antibiotics developed intestinal bacteria that were highly resistant to antibiotics. Further, these resistant bacteria could be transferred to farm workers.

The agricultural industry was skeptical. Prevailing wisdom was that low-dose antibiotics, routinely fed to promote livestock growth rather than treat disease, would result in low-level resistance, and only in the animals themselves. Levy's work, including his 1992 book "The Antibiotic Paradox: How Miracle Drugs Are Destroying the Miracle," has been credited with prompting the FDA to shift its guidelines on the use of antimicrobial drugs in food-producing animals.

In 1978, Levy's lab showed that _E. coli_ resistance to tetracycline is due to the bacteria actively pumping the antibiotic out of the cell. Controversial at the time, this "active efflux" mechanism is now an accepted paradigm for a critical class of antibiotic resistance and is also a mechanism for resistance to drugs that treat cancer.

Levy believed that education of scientists, clinicians, and the public was essential to preventing a looming health crisis. Although he described an early interview with Bryant Gumbel on the Today show as "uncomfortable," he became a quotable expert sought out by leading news media.

"Bacteria have seen dinosaurs come, and they've seen them go," he told Dan Rather. "So we aren't going to destroy the bacterial world. We live in the bacterial world." He repeatedly called for "prudent use" of antibiotics, which he termed "societal drugs" because use by one person affects others. He pointed to studies showing that people living in one household were affected by the anti-acne antibiotic being taken by another member of the same household.

Recognizing that the pipeline for new antibiotics was empty, he lobbied for incentives to make discovery and development of new antibiotics economically feasible. Along with Nobel Prize winner Walter Gilbert, he founded Paratek Pharmaceuticals, which developed a new tetracycline derivative, omadacycline, to which target bacteria were not resistant. He also called for rigorous management of antibiotics at hospitals and for advanced diagnostics to identify diseases earlier and more accurately to better target appropriate antibiotic use.

In 1981, he co-founded the Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics, now part of the International Society of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, which brought together infectious disease specialists from more than a hundred counties. "On a shoestring, he put together this worldwide network to call attention to the problem and document it. And finally, the world woke up," Berman said.

Levy never shied away from controversy. When he advocated prohibiting antimicrobials like triclosan from common products such as soap and hand sanitizer because they left behind a dangerous residue associated with antibiotic resistance, product manufacturers protested loudly. But changes in FDA regulations ultimately vindicated him, and he had the satisfaction of seeing the United States launch a National Action Plan for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria and the World Health Organization name antimicrobial resistance as one of the top threats to global health.

Levy's work also inspired the new Tufts Center for Integrated Management of Antimicrobial Resistance (CIMAR) announced in March [2019] by Tufts University and Tufts Medical Center. Led by Helen Boucher, director of the Infectious Diseases Fellowship Program at the medical center and clinical professor at the School of Medicine, and Ralph Isberg, professor of molecular biology and microbiology at the School of Medicine, CIMAR will tap researchers from across the university to work alongside colleagues at the medical center.

"Stuart Levy was a towering figure," Isberg said, "not because of his physical stature but because of the force of his ideas."

Matching those ideas were his kindness, humility, integrity, and love of life. Describing himself as "an optimist to my toes," he made friends all over the world, and his fluency in 7 languages enabled him to support them through good times and bad, as well as meet and court his wife of 35 years, Cecile Pastel Levy, a native of France.

His children -- Arthur, Suzanne, and Walter -- recall a father who regularly tucked them into bed when they were small; read their schoolwork; taught them how to tie the perfect bow tie that was among his trademarks; shared his love of music, painting, and singing; and talked about his work without condescension or pretense, whether he was invited into their elementary school classroom or college lecture hall.

"I can't think of even 5 times in my life when he wasn't available," said Suzanne Levy Friedman. "He was the rock."

Leong described Levy as "confident, as he needed to be. But," he continued, "he was always extremely gracious, never dismissive. When I arrived in 2012 [as department chair], I asked him what role he'd like, what he needed. Stuart had only one request. He wanted to lecture 1st-year medical students and educate them on antimicrobial resistance. He didn't ask for more space or money. I thought that was remarkable."

[Byline: Kim Thurler]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Thu 19 Sep 2019
Source: Washington Post [edited]
https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/obituaries/stuart-levy-microbiologist-who-sounded-alarm-on-antibiotic-resistance-dies-at-80/2019/09/19/4011ea96-dae9-11e9-a688-303693fb4b0b_story.html


Stuart Levy, microbiologist who sounded alarm on antibiotic resistance, dies at 80
---------------------------------
Stuart B. Levy, a physician and microbiologist who sounded the alarm on the dangers of antibiotic resistance, demonstrating that drugs routinely given to fatten farm animals posed a threat to human health, died 4 Sep [2019] at his home in Boston. He was 80.

He had Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Suzanne Levy Friedman.

Long before "superbugs" became a buzzword for drug-resistant bacteria, Dr. Levy was researching and drawing attention to the issue of antibiotic resistance, which the World Health Organization labeled a "major threat to public health" in 2014. In the United States, at least 2 million people get an antibiotic-resistant infection each year, and at least 23 000 die, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

For decades, much of the country's antibiotics have gone to farm animals, helping chickens, turkeys, cows, and pigs grow bigger and better.

In a much-cited 1976 paper, Dr. Levy found that chickens raised on feed with low doses of antibiotics developed drug-resistant bacteria that were then transferred to farmers, posing a significant health risk.

"For many years he was a voice in the wilderness, talking about things that were not a part of the conventional wisdom," said Martin J. Blaser, a Rutgers University microbiologist. "When people like Stuey said, 'We're wasting our precious patrimony for a few dollars,' the [agriculture] industry stonewalled it. He was up against Goliath."

Dr. Levy was based at the Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston, where he taught for 47 years before retiring in 2018, and displayed a literary and artistic side that complemented his immersion in medical science. An English major in college, he struck up a correspondence with Samuel Beckett and met the playwright in Paris. Later, on what his daughter recalled as a trip to Africa, he saw someone playing the ukulele and decided to learn the instrument, strumming his own songs during academic meetings.

Trained as a hematologist, Dr. Levy continued to see patients decades after beginning his work on antibiotics, invariably greeting them in his white coat and bow tie. His career bridged research and activism: Seeking to translate his findings into public policy, he met with regulators and politicians, discussed antibiotics on TV with Bryant Gumbel and Dan Rather, and wrote a popular 1992 book, "The Antibiotic Paradox: How Miracle Drugs Are Destroying the Miracle."

He also formed the nonprofit Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics and, in 1981, persuaded 147 scientists from 27 countries to sign a statement on antibiotic misuse, according to Scott H. Podolsky, a Harvard professor of global health and social medicine.

"It was Dr. Levy who catalyzed the transformation of antibiotic resistance into a shared, global concern, mandating global collaborations across various domains of medicine, science, industry, agriculture, and politics," Podolsky said by email.

On Capitol Hill, Dr. Levy met with legislators such as Rep. Louise M. Slaughter (D-NY), a microbiologist who repeatedly introduced legislation to restrict the use of antibiotics in healthy cattle.

His efforts found mixed success. Slaughter's bill never passed (she died last year [2018]), but in 2013, the FDA began phasing out the use of certain antibiotics for farm animals. Two years later, President Barack Obama announced a USD 1.2 billion initiative to identify emerging superbugs and increase funding for new antibiotics and vaccines.

Dr. Levy did not oppose antibiotics outright but advocated what he described as "prudent use" of the drugs, which were developed in the early 20th century and popularized in the 1940s, when penicillin entered widespread use. Antibiotics were a powerful new tool against once-deadly infections, and they were soon used in livestock feed.

By the early 1960s, scientists including Tsutomu Watanabe had identified bacteria that were newly resistant to the drugs and that spread antibiotic-resistant genetic material among themselves and even to different species.

Dr. Levy met Watanabe while in medical school and traveled to Tokyo in 1964, spending a summer in the Japanese researcher's lab and collaborating with him on several papers. Turning his focus to antibiotic resistance, he conducted his best-known work while sponsored by an unlikely partner, the Animal Health Institute, a trade group that was hoping to demonstrate the effectiveness of antibiotics on farms.

In 1974, at 36, he devised a study that drew on the feces of 300 Leghorn chickens raised near Boston, as well as fecal samples from 6 local families. "We're asking you all to be part of an experiment," he told them over hot dogs and hamburgers, according to Maryn McKenna's book "Big Chicken." "We'd like you to donate something that you have to science. Frankly," he continued, "we need your s---."

The families obliged, and the results -- published in the New England Journal of Medicine -- disappointed his sponsors and surprised even Dr. Levy. "These data speak strongly against the unqualified and unlimited use of drug feeds in animal husbandry," he wrote with his 2 co-authors, "and speak for reevaluation of this form of widespread treatment of animals."

Months later, in 1977, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Donald Kennedy attempted to ban the use of growth-promoting antibiotics. That effort was quickly halted under pressure from industry groups and pharmaceutical companies, which said there were gaps in the research.

"Our study from 1976 was [and still is] the only prospective US study on this, and industry didn't want more studies," Dr. Levy told The Scientist magazine in 2015. "They were upset that our data showed them to be wrong. This was highly political."

Stuart Blank Levy was born in Wilmington, DE, on [21 Nov 1938]. His mother was a homemaker, and his father was a physician who conducted house calls, sometimes taking payment in the form of produce from local farmers.

All 3 of the Levy children went into medicine. Dr. Levy's identical twin brother, Jay A. Levy, is a cancer and AIDS researcher at the University of California at San Francisco, where his lab was one of the 1st groups to isolate HIV; his sister, Ellen Levy Koenig, also studies the AIDS virus.

The brothers were close enough that they executed an unannounced identity switch for one week in college, with Stuart attending Wesleyan University in Connecticut while Jay took his place at Williams College in Massachusetts, where Dr. Levy graduated in 1960.

Dr. Levy received a medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania in 1965, completed his residency at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan, and performed postdoctoral research at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, MD.

In 1971, he became a professor at Tufts, where he directed the Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance. He was president of the American Society for Microbiology and wrote more than 300 papers, including an influential 1978 study that identified the role of "efflux pumps" in antibiotic resistance.

With Walter Gilbert, a Nobel Prize-winning biochemist, he also founded a pharmaceutical company, Paratek, to develop new antibiotics.

Survivors include his wife of 35 years, the former Cecile Pastel, a French-born dermatologist who lives in Boston; 3 children, Suzanne Levy Friedman of Washington, Arthur Levy of San Francisco, and Walter Levy of Boston; and his 2 siblings.

In interviews, Dr. Levy often spoke of antibiotic stewardship -- a concept that is sometimes referred to as "stuartship," in his honor -- while urging patients and doctors to avoid taking the drugs for minor ailments.

"Bacteria have seen dinosaurs come, and they've seen them go," he told Rather in 2011. "So we aren't going to destroy the bacterial world. We live in the bacterial world."

[Byline: Harrison Smith]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[I had the good fortune to know Stuart both professionally as well as personally for the past 40-plus years. The world has lost a great visionary and soldier in the fight against antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The 2 obituaries included in our post do an excellent job of describing the professional person Stuart was. His list of achievements is long and well summarized above. More recently Stuart was able to see some of the fruits of his missions with the launching of the Stuart B. Levy, MD Tufts CIMAR Symposium on [18 Mar 2019].

ProMED's involvement in AMR began with discussions with Stuart on how we might collaborate to develop an AMR network on ProMED. An AMR network will be launched in the coming months. He'll be looking down with his smile.

On the personal side, they didn't come much nicer. Stuart was a devoted husband, father, sibling, and son prior to his parent's passing. He was always bursting with pride for the accomplishments of his children. Lastly, he was a wonderful friend and fun to spend time with at family functions.

As I said earlier, the world has lost a great visionary and a wonderful person. - Mod.MPP]

.................................................mpp/tw/mpp
</body>
