<header id=016136>
Published Date: 2021-03-09 01:09:03 EST
Subject: PRO/AH> Equine rhinopneumonitis - Spain (03): (VC) EHV-1, horse, intl spread, Italy
Archive Number: 20210309.8235555
</header>
<body id=016136>
EQUINE RHINOPNEUMONITIS - SPAIN (03): (VALENCIA) EHV-1, HORSE, INTERNATIONAL SPREAD, ITALY
******************************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Epidemiologically related 2 outbreaks in Lombardia, Italy
[2] EHV-1 Valencia event and transboundary ramifications - timetable

******
[1] Epidemiologically related 2 outbreaks in Lombardia, Italy
Date: Mon 8 Mar 2021
From: Andrea Carvelli <andrea.carvelli@yahoo.it> [edited]


Re: Equine rhinopneumonitis - Spain (02): (VC) EHV-1, horse, intl spread 20210308.8233620

EHV-1, Italy
-----------
In Italy, after the outbreak in Valencia (Spain), 4 outbreaks of rhinopneumonitis have been notified, 3 in Lombardia region and one in the province of Trento. Two outbreaks (both in Lombardia) are epidemiologically linked to Valencia.

--
Andrea Carvelli
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del Lazio e della Toscana "M. Aleandri"
<andrea.carvelli@yahoo.it>

[We are grateful to Dr Carvelli for the above timely update; Italy becomes the 7th country suffering EHV-1 infections in horses related to the event in Valencia, which -- as indicated in 20210308.8233620 -- include Spain, Germany, Belgium, France, Sweden, and Qatar.

For subscribers' convenience, we present (item 2) FEI's timetable of this concerning event since its reported start on 20 Feb 2021 and as of 8 Mar 2021, which already includes preliminary data on the spread to Italy. - Mod.AS]

******
[2] EHV-1 Valencia event and transboundary ramifications - timetable

Date: Mon 8 Mar 2021 [accessed]
FEI (International Equestrian Federation) website, EHV-1 - timeline [edited]
https://inside.fei.org/fei/ehv-1/timeline


Timeline
--------
1. 20 Feb 2021:
1st notification of sick horses: The FEI Veterinary Department was informed by the onsite FEI veterinary delegate in the afternoon of 20 Feb 2021 that 11 horses had fever at the CES Valencia Spring Tour (ESP) [meanings of abbreviations unclear. - Mod.SH]. Later the same day, the number had increased to 20.

The FEI was also advised of 4 cases of suspected equine herpesvirus (EHV-1) in horses that had left the venue on 14 Feb 2021 and became sick shortly after returning to their home country (France). At least one of these horses was showing neurological signs.

With this combined information, the FEI concluded that this was an outbreak of the neurological form of EHV-1 and immediately told organisers and onsite officials to cancel the rest of the event in Valencia.

The FEI informed the organisers of the other tours on the Iberian Peninsula of the situation and instructed them not to accept any horses that had been competing at Valencia.

2. 21 Feb 2021:
The FEI followed up with the OC [organising committee? - Mod.SH] treating veterinarians on the situation with horses in Valencia, and this was then continued on a daily basis.

The FEI veterinary delegate and venue veterinary services manager remained on venue to treat horses, where necessary, and implement a mitigation plan for containing the outbreak in accordance with the FEI Veterinary Regulations.

With the information available, the FEI established that there was potential disease transmission between horses that had been at the venue in the period between 1 and 20 Feb 2021.

The FEI commenced identification of the more than 700 in-contact horses that had participated at Valencia since 1 Feb 2021.

3. 22 Feb 2021:
Local authorities took over venue: the regional branch of the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture (MAPA) formally took over the Valencia venue.

Tracing & blocking of in-contact horses: Within less than 48 hours of being informed of the outbreak, the FEI traced and blocked in the FEI Database all 752 horses that had participated in Valencia, meaning that these horses are not permitted to enter any FEI events until they have fulfilled the necessary testing requirements.

The FEI confirmed the identification of the Valencia horses to the organisers of the other tours on the Iberian Peninsula, and instructed them not to accept these horses.

All athletes that had participated with horses in Valencia since 1 Feb 2021 received a communique outlining the FEI measures blocking the in-contact horses and the actions that they personally needed to take to help prevent the further spread of this virus.

3. 23 Feb 2021:
The FEI contacted the national federations (NFs) of athletes who had left the venue with their horses without the necessary health certificates and asked these NFs to contact their national veterinary authority.

The FEI contacted the organisers of events in other parts of Europe with lists of horses and athletes that had been in Valencia.

Expert support: the FEI initiated a series of regular meetings (ongoing) with world leading epidemiologists to conduct a full risk assessment of the further spread of the outbreak.

The FEI followed up on test results from venue horses in Valencia.

4. 24 Feb 2021:
Official notification by Spanish Authorities: the Secretariat of Sanidad e Higiene Animal y Trazabilidad (the regional branch of MAPA) published an official notification of the EHV-1 outbreak "Confirmacion Rinoneumonitis equina en concurso hipico en Valencia".

The FEI continued to follow up with event organisers to ensure that no in-contact horses from Valencia were onsite at their venues and, if they were, that they were in isolation and under strict biosecurity measures.

Following discussions with the FEI, the Spanish Equestrian Federation was in direct contact with the Spanish Ministry to ensure that a team of FEI supporting veterinarians would be allowed onsite in Valencia to supplement the OC treating veterinarians already onsite.

The FEI monitored the health situation of horses on all jumping tours on the Iberian Peninsula.

5. 25 Feb 2021:
Urgent request for help: The FEI was alerted by athletes in Valencia that conditions onsite had deteriorated, and they needed urgent assistance, including pharmaceuticals for the sick horses.

The FEI requested the Spanish National Federation to contact the Ministry for information on treatment protocols for sick horses and plans for release of healthy horses. The Spanish Federation provided immediate help.

The FEI contacted DG Sante of the European Commission to update them and request support with Ministry contacts in Spain.

6. 26 Feb 2021:
1st recorded death: The FEI was advised that a horse had been euthanised at the veterinary hospital in Valencia due to EHV-1 that evening.

Of the 150 horses still on the venue, a total of 72 horses showed clinical signs of EHV-1. Of the 47 horses that had been tested, 17 were confirmed positive for the virus.

The FEI requested and received agreement from the Spanish regional veterinary authorities to allow 5 additional veterinarians onsite to treat the affected horses. As soon as we received the necessary approval, the FEI entered discussion with the Spanish, French and German National Federations on the provision of additional veterinarians to Valencia.

The FEI also requested a detailed plan from the regional veterinary authorities on the treatment of sick horses, management of the outbreak, and the plan for getting healthy horses off the venue.

Three horses were transferred to the veterinary hospital with neurological symptoms, but one was recovering well and was expected to return to the venue.

The FEI also received information that there may be additional numbers of horses displaying neurological signs but did not have confirmation at that stage.

The FEI was informed of 2 possible further outbreaks in Belgium that traced back to Valencia.

7. 27 Feb 2021:
Confirmation was received by the FEI of a 2nd related equine fatality, also at the Valencia veterinary hospital.

Arrival of veterinary support: The Spanish national head veterinarian, together with the assigned leader of the FEI veterinary support team, arrived onsite.

It was arranged for FEI veterinary manager Goncalo Paixao to travel to Valencia the following day to establish improved lines of communication between the authorities, the Valencia organisers and athletes.

The FEI veterinary director updated European Equestrian Federation president Theo Ploegmakers on the outbreak.

A horse in Villamoura (POR) died suddenly of a suspected circulatory collapse. As a precaution, the FEI ordered urgent PCR testing which came back negative for EHV-1.

8. 28 Feb 2021:
Information was received by the FEI that 2 horses had been euthanised on-venue in Valencia, bringing the number of related deaths to 4.

The FEI was informed of outbreaks in Germany that traced back to Valencia.

Boosted onsite support: two veterinarians, organised by the German National Federation, arrived onsite in Valencia to assist with treating the sick horses.

The French National Federation and the FEI coordinated a supply of inflatable support mats to assist recumbent horses to stand. Rescue nets and emergency slings were sourced from Switzerland.

The FEI sourced extra stabling so that healthy/recovered horses in Valencia could be better separated from sick animals on venue to prevent further transmission. These were to be divided between the venue and the Valencia Equine Hospital in order to free up emergency treatment permanent stables.

The FEI again directly contacted National Federations with horses that participated in Valencia requesting confirmation that they had contacted all their athletes that were in Valencia, that their national veterinary authorities had been informed about the outbreak and the returning horses, and that the necessary isolation of returning horses and in-contact horses had been put in place and compliance is being controlled.

9. 1 Mar 2021:
FEI cancelled events in mainland Europe: following a detailed risk assessment conducted together with leading epidemiologist Richard Newton, the FEI cancelled international events in 10 countries on the European mainland with immediate effect and until 28 Mar 2021 due to the rapid evolution of the EHV-1 outbreak.

The decision covers events in France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, Italy, Austria, Poland, Netherlands, Germany and Slovakia.

The decision applies to all FEI disciplines, but in order to prevent huge numbers of horses simultaneously departing the Jumping Tours on the Iberian Peninsula, in Italy and Belgium that have been ongoing for a number of weeks, these specific Tours will be allowed to continue as individual "bubbles" on the condition that absolutely no new horses are allowed to enter the venues and no positive cases of EHV-1 are confirmed.

The Jumping Tour venues in Vejer de la Frontera (ESP), Vilamoura (POR), San Giovanni in Marignano (ITA) and Gorla Minore (ITA) were required to have stringent biosecurity protocols in place and additional FEI Veterinary Delegates onsite, put in place with the assistance of the Spanish and Italian national head veterinarians.

Oliva Nova (ESP) had already advised the FEI the same afternoon that it had decided to cancel the rest of its scheduled competitions in the Mediterranean Equestrian Tour III. Opglabbeek (BEL) also informed the FEI that it had cancelled its events in March 2021.

The French National Federation confirmed it had cancelled all national and international events.

The FEI strongly recommended that all affected member Federations should also cancel their national events.

The FEI received notification on the evening of 1 Mar 2021 that one of 4 horses that had travelled from Valencia to Doha (QAT) was showing clinical signs in the isolation stables and had tested positive for EHV-1. The horse was transferred to the isolation unit of the neighbouring veterinary clinic, together with a 2nd German horse that returned an inconclusive result and required retesting.

The FEI continued to collate further information about related outbreaks and the measures put in place at local level to handle any outbreaks.

10. 2 Mar 2021:
The German and Czech Equestrian Federations cancelled all events until 28 Mar 2021.

Risk assessment for Doha: In order to fully assess whether the GCT/GCL event would be permitted to go ahead in Doha, the FEI Veterinary Department conducted a full risk assessment to evaluate the biosecurity measures already in place on-venue, focusing on the potential risk of viral transmission to healthy horses. As the 4 horses that had travelled from Valencia had been in isolation since 22 Feb 2021, it was agreed to wait for the results of the PCR tests on all other horses on the venue, which were completely separated from the positive horse.

A veterinary internal medicine specialist, sent by the French National Federation, arrived onsite in Valencia.

The organisers of San Giovanni in Marignano (ITA) advised the FEI that they had cancelled their Jumping Tour.

The FEI continued its follow up with national federations and organising committees to evaluate their preventive measures and protocols in place for handling outbreaks.

11. 3 Mar 2021:
There had been no more equine fatalities at the venue in Valencia since the previous weekend, but one horse died at a veterinary hospital in Barcelona, and one died in Germany. Both of these horses had been in Valencia. There were no reports of any further related deaths, but this brought the total number of deaths in the outbreak to 6.

A total of 83 on-venue horses in Valencia showed clinical signs and were being treated, but none of these horses were recumbent or required slings for support.

Fifteen horses were being treated in external clinics (13 in Valencia and 2 in Barcelona).

Improved communications: the FEI veterinary manager organised an onsite meeting in Valencia between Spanish ministry officials (MAPA), the organisers, the OC veterinarians, an athlete representative, and the FEI treatment team leader to help resolve issues. Agreement was reached on roles, treatment protocols, and a new plan for separation of horses following requests from athletes and owners for their horses to be grouped together without infringing biosecurity protocols.

Carl-Walter Fox (SWE), the athlete representative in Valencia, who had been in constant contact with the FEI veterinary director since the start of the outbreak, initiated more detailed daily reports.

Some of the additional temporary stabling delivered to the venue was not up to standard, and all of it was unsuitable for large horses. Replacement boxes were organised.

The FEI received early morning confirmation that all competing horses in Doha had tested negative for EHV-1. The FEI veterinary director met with the Doha [Qatar] organisers and senior FEI officials onsite at Al Shaqab to further assess the situation.

Doha given conditional go-ahead: following further consultation with leading epidemiologist Dr Gittan Groendahl about the situation in Doha, the FEI agreed that competition could go ahead as scheduled from 4-6 Mar 2021 subject to a series of stringent conditions. However, the FEI reserved the right to cancel the event if there were any changes to the situation.

The conditions for continuation included maintaining strict isolation protocols for the 4 Valencia horses; twice-daily temperature checks for all competing horses; minimising all contact between horses; treatment boxes to be closed, and treating/testing of horses permitted in the horse's own stable under supervision of an FEI official; daily calls between the FEI, the organisers, relevant onsite FEI officials, and athlete representative Kevin Staut. The conditions also included confirmation from the organisers that no sanctions would be applied against individual athletes or teams if they chose not to compete.

A case of EHV-1 (neurological form) was reported in Ocala, Florida (USA), similar in nature, but unrelated to the neurological strain of EHV-1 in Spain and other European countries. The horse had not been shipped from Europe and was not on the Ocala showgrounds at the onset of symptoms. The event in Ocala was not an FEI event; however, after consultation with the FEI Veterinary Department, additional onsite biosecurity measures were implemented in Wellington, Florida, by the FEI veterinary delegate.

12. 4 Mar 2021:
The FEI was informed of 2 related equine deaths, one in Germany and one in Barcelona, bringing the official and confirmed number of deaths in the outbreak to 8.

The Swedish Federation advised the FEI that a number of horses returning to Sweden from Valencia had tested positive for EHV-1 and were showing clinical signs.

Suspected neurological case at Sunshine Tour: The FEI was informed by the team leader of the 3 additional FEI veterinary delegates at the Spanish Sunshine Tour venue in Vejer de la Frontera (ESP) that a horse had developed neurological signs of EHV-1, although it had reportedly tested negative to the virus. The horse had been in isolation 2 km from the competition since 26 Feb 2021.

Conditional go-ahead: following a full risk analysis conducted by the Spanish Ministry (MAPA), the Spanish National Federation, the organisers, FEI officials, the jumping athlete representative, and the FEI, all parties agreed that -- exceptionally, and in order to ensure an orderly and bio-secure departure of horses -- competition could continue until Sun 7 Mar 2021 subject to a number of strict conditions.

The conditions for continuation included the implementation of additional biosecurity measures and that any horses departing the venue had to have the required health certification. In order to prevent horses leaving without the necessary documentation, athletes were advised that sanctions could be enforced by their national veterinary authorities and the FEI. The local authorities agreed to bring in additional personnel to expedite issuing of health certificates. However, the FEI reserved the right to cancel the full event if the situation changed.

The FEI veterinary director liaised directly with the Belgian National Federation and team veterinarian on the treatment of their horse in the isolation stables at Vejer.

The FEI jumping director arrived onsite in Valencia and held a meeting with the organisers to resolve a number of issues. He then called a follow-up meeting between all parties to ensure the lines of communication remained open.

The athlete representative onsite in Valencia reported that Covid-19 testing had been put in place on the venue.

The competent veterinary authorities of France, Germany and the Netherlands were working on creating bio-secure highways to get sick or in-contact horses home from Spain and Portugal, having secured the necessary permissions from Spanish authorities.

12. 5 Mar 2021:
The FEI was notified of another equine fatality at the clinic in Valencia, bringing the number of related deaths in the outbreak to 9.

Cancellation of Spanish Sunshine Tour: the FEI was informed in the afternoon by the team leader of the 3 additional FEI veterinary delegates that a 2nd horse at the Spanish Sunshine Tour venue had been put into isolation after developing mild neurological signs and a slightly elevated temperature. As the FEI had also received evidence late that afternoon from the official laboratory in Madrid that the negative test on the 1st horse showing neurological signs in Vejer was inconclusive, the FEI arranged a meeting with the organisers and onsite FEI officials. After a follow-up emergency internal meeting, the FEI informed the organisers that the event was cancelled with immediate effect. The FEI again stressed that horses should not leave the venue without the necessary documentation from the Spanish authorities.

Stopover stabling for returning horses: The French Federation (FFE) established transit stabling in Le Mans and Lyons for horses travelling back from Spain, Portugal and Italy. The FFE, together with the FEI, arranged for 24-hour veterinary support in Le Mans and is working to provide the same service in Lyons. Places should be booked as soon as possible. More information on these stabling options and potentially additional locations in France will be updated here.

The athlete representative in Valencia reported to the FEI veterinary director that supplies were continuing to be delivered to the venue and that new stabling would be arriving onsite the following day. There was also a plan put in place, approved by the veterinary team, on where and how to exercise the healthy horses. The onsite veterinary team reported that the sick horses are improving.

EEF support: the European Equestrian Federation (EEF) provided its members with the guidelines of the European College of Equine Internal Medicine (ECEIM) for dealing with returning horses from EHV-1 outbreaks and also the British Equestrian Federation biosecurity protocol.

The EEF contracted Dutch veterinarian and EHV expert Prof Dr Marianne Sloet to provide guidance to the EEF and its member federations and encouraged those in urgent need of veterinary advice to contact the EEF.

The FEI formally addressed the Veterinary Authority of Qatar about its concerns about the 4 horses that had been in Valencia and advised that, as agreed with the Doha organisers, these horses must be transported back to Europe separately from the competing horses.

The Swedish National Federation confirmed that it had cancelled all national events.

13. 6 Mar 2021:
FEEVA support: The FEI, supported by the Federation of European Equine Veterinary Associations (FEEVA), formally addressed the Secretariat of Sanidad e Higiene Animal y Trazabilidad (the regional branch of MAPA) proposing improved protocols for allowing in-contact horses to leave the venue in Valencia.

Improvements in Valencia: the athlete representative in Valencia reported that the daily onsite information meeting was well attended. The medical condition of the horses remains stable with less serious cases reported. While these were positive signs, the veterinary team stressed that it is important to be aware that the disease was yet not fully under control.

Extra grooms are being made available for teams requiring support to look after their horses. Additional truck drivers are being sought to help in transporting the horses home from Valencia.

A French team specializing in international quarantine stables provided recommendations on good biosecurity practice, including washing and disinfection of trucks and equipment to prevent further spread of the virus.

Access to the individual zones in the Valencia stabling was further strengthened with the use of bracelets in order to prevent movement between different zones. A French team has provided an onsite PCR lab to help with monitoring sick horses, allowing a faster detection of the movement of the virus between horses and establish whether there is a pattern.

New stabling arrived on venue, allowing the horses to be divided into smaller groups. Additional stables are available in the area and can be installed immediately if required.

The Veterinary Authority of Qatar confirmed that the 4 in-contact horses that had been in Valencia and were still in isolation in Doha would not be flying home to Europe from Qatar with the other horses and would be remaining in isolation until at least 15 Mar 2021.

The FEI continued to address the Spanish Sunshine Tour Organisers about allowing additional veterinary delegates onsite to support the biosecurity measures on the venue and treatment of the affected horses in the isolation stables.

The FEI, supported by FEEVA and the Asociacion de Veterinarios Especialistas en Equidos (the Spanish branch of FEEVA), provided assistance to 2 individual athletes and their veterinarians to ensure that the 2 horses with neurological signs in the Vejer de la Frontera isolation stables would be allowed into specialist treatment clinics.

The FEI received official notification that a 2nd horse in Florida (USA) had been confirmed positive to EHV-1. The horse had a fever but was not exhibiting any neurological signs. The Florida Department of Agriculture published on its website that the 1st horse was housed at the World Equestrian Center Barn D during week 7 and the 2nd horse was housed in Barn D during week 8. The 2nd horse left the World Equestrian Center on 25 Feb 2021. The Department update confirmed that 67 other horses had been exposed.

14. 7 Mar 2021:
The International Jumping Riders Club (IJRC) published information for those with horses travelling back from Spain, reminding members of the importance of cleaning and disinfection of stables prior to departure, and of transport vehicles, to minimise the risk of further transmission of the virus. The club listed transit stabling options in addition to the 2 stops in Le Mans and Lyons organised by the FFE. Details are available on the IJRC website.

The FEI continued to follow up on the condition and veterinary care of the 2 horses that had developed neurological signs in Vejer de la Frontera.

The FEI veterinary director requested an update from the primary veterinary delegate on the remaining horses on venue
The athlete representative in Valencia reported a very smooth daily meeting, where the onsite veterinary team distributed a short-term rehabilitation plan for the horses over the next 7 days. The consignment of extra stabling organised by Katharina Offel is now onsite, and 18 of these boxes have been provided to the Hospital Veterinario CEU clinic, which is treating the horses.

15. 8 Mar 2021:
The FEI was notified that a horse had been euthanised at the clinic in Valencia, bringing the number of related deaths to 10.

The FEI was notified of a related case of EHV-1 in Milan (ITA).

The organisers of the Jumping Tour in Gorla Minore (ITA) advised the FEI of the cancellation of the remaining 3 weeks of competition. This was done due to low entry numbers. There were no sick horses at the Italian venue.

Offers of help continued to flood in, including offers of truck drivers to assist with transporting horses to their home countries.

--
communicated by:
ProMED
<promed@promedmail.org>

[According to the above data (see in timeline 20 Feb 2021), the outbreak of the neurological form of EHV-1 had started at the CES Valencia Spring Tour earlier than 14 Feb 2021. It will be interesting to note whether the source of infection has been detected. The event is continuing. - Mod.AS

HealthMap/ProMED map:
Spain: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8235555,43]
See Also
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Spain (02): (VC) EHV-1, horse, intl spread 20210308.8233620
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Spain: (VC) EHV-1, horse, susp, RFI 20210224.8211580
Equine herpesvirus - North America (06): USA (FL, PA) horse 20210306.8232386
Equine herpesvirus - North America (04): Canada (ON) horse 20210221.8205196
Equine herpesvirus - North America (03): Canada (QB) horse 20210220.8203803
Equine herpesvirus - North America (02): USA (WA) horse 20210218.8199360
Equine herpesvirus - North America (01): USA (VA) horse 20210213.8189608
2019
---
Equine herpesvirus - North America (21): USA (NV) horse, EHV-1 20191024.6744841
Equine herpesvirus - North America (08): USA (AZ) horse, EHV-1 20190330.6395621
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Norway: (HO) EHV-1, horse, OIE 20190310.6359733
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Sweden: (ST, UP) Norway, EHV-1, horse 20190305.6349117
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Germany (02): (BY) EHV-1, horse, spread 20190305.6348243
Equine herpesvirus - Germany: (BY) EHV-1, horse 20190204.6294642
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Norway: (HO) EHV-1, horse, OIE 20190310.6359733
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Sweden: (ST, UP) Norway, EHV-1, horse 20190305.6349117
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Germany (02): (BY) EHV-1, horse, spread 20190305.6348243
Equine rhinopneumonitis - France: (eastern) EHV-1, EHV-4 20180509.5789577
Equine rhinopneumonitis - USA: (NM) EHV-1 20160705.4326536
Equine rhinopneumonitis - New Zealand: (WK) EHV-1, OIE 20140202.2249098
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Chile: (RM) EHV-4, OIE 20131204.2090938
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Israel: (TA) OIE 20120126.1022175
Equine rhinopneumonitis - United Arab Emirates: (Dubai) OIE 20100521.1683
Equine rhinopneumonitis - Israel: OIE 20050803.2258
.................................................arn/msp/sh
</body>
