<header id=057098>
Published Date: 2015-09-17 15:06:08 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (OR)
Archive Number: 20150917.3652907
</header>
<body id=057098>
CORYNEBACTERIUM, EQUINE - USA: (OREGON)
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 16 Sep 2015
Source: The News-Review [edited]
http://www.nrtoday.com/news/18202634-113/pigeon-fever-sweeps-through-douglas-county-infecting-and


Pigeon fever infecting and killing horses in Douglas County [Oregon]
--------------------------------------------------------------------
In late August [2015], JK noticed a small lump on her horse's side.

Not thinking much of it, JK let it be, ensuring that the area was clean, especially after the lump popped.

But shortly afterward, another lump appeared, this time on the horse's stomach. Then another sprouted up between the horse's legs. Soon, a large, basketball-sized growth bulged from the horse's side.

"He suffered a lot and lost about 300 pounds," JK said of her husband's registered quarter horse. "But the fever was soon gone and all of the little lumps had popped and been cleaned up."

The next morning, however, their prized horse and companion was gone. Dead from a disease JK had learned the name of only a few days prior: pigeon fever.

Typically characterized by intramuscular abscesses, primarily in the chest area of a horse, pigeon fever gives the horse a puffed-out appearance, similar to a pigeon, granting the disease its name.

The abscesses commonly appear externally near the breast muscles, along the underside of the belly or the groin.

Abscesses also may appear internally on the horse's vital organs, such as the lungs, liver or kidney. These growths are generally considered more dangerous and can be fatal if not treated properly.

Besides the large, pus-filled lumps, other symptoms include lethargy, stiffness and lameness from the pain and swelling.

The disease is commonly spread through bacteria that lives and multiples in dry soil and manure. Typically, horses contract the disease through an open wound or fly bite, with the bacteria entering through an abrasion or bite, according to Joe Roberts, a veterinarian at Calapooia Veterinary Center in Sutherlin [Douglas County, Oregon].

"It's a bacterium that's found most everywhere worldwide," he said. "It grows best without oxygen and, generally speaking, is transferred by vectors -- biting flies or things that can pick up the bacteria and then land on wounds or inject the bacteria into the animal."

Roberts, who formerly worked in Central Oregon, said the disease usually runs in cycles, disappearing for a number of years before ripping through populations.

Once the disease is present, Roberts said horse owners should be extra vigilant about keeping their horses and barns free of flies.

Amanda Friesen, office manager at the Sutherlin Veterinary Hospital, agreed, reiterating that the best preventive practice is to be proactive with fly spray to minimize the chances of contracting or spreading the disease.

"The best thing people can do is fly control," she said. "Typically, pigeon fever is considered an infectious disease that you see in a dry and arid climate because it can aerosolize, and flies can pick it up from the dust and spread it. It doesn't have to stay wet to be transmitted."

In most cases, the disease causes giant pus-filled abscesses that need to be opened or lanced, drained, flushed out, and in some cases antibiotics may be required.

Friesen said that often a veterinarian will order an ultrasound to locate deep internal abscesses and find the best place for them to be drained.

Currently, no vaccine exists, but an Oregon equine lameness and sports medicine veterinarian has been working to change that.

Patrick Young, a veterinarian at The Athletic Horse in Bend [Deschutes County, Oregon], sought to put an end to the painful and debilitating disease after treating horses from multiple clients for pigeon fever.

"It's extremely frustrating to treat from the standpoint that there's not a quick fix," said Young, who moved to Bend from Oklahoma.

The biotechnological companies he approached did not want to develop a vaccine unless the vaccine would generate millions of dollars annually. Having earned a degree in animal science and a minor in biomedical science at Texas A&M University, Young decided to take on pigeon fever himself and develop his own vaccine.

Young took bacteria that causes pigeon fever from a patient in Oklahoma, cultured it and outsourced the development to Colorado Serum Company.

There, the bacteria were sterilized, inactivated and added to a substance that enhances the immune system, according to Young. As expected, the vaccine worked.

Currently, Young is awaiting approval from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, but he still expects the vaccine to be available in the spring or summer of 2016.

"There was another company that came out with (a vaccine) but within 2 weeks of being on the market, they had to pull it because they had some significant side effects, and that's not why I'm doing this," he said. "We're in it to protect horses and to ensure that there aren't any side effects, if we can avoid it."

Though the vaccine was not approved in time to save JK's horse, she welcomed the news of a possible cure, if it means helping protect horses from the bizarre infection later on.

"I did everything right, but suddenly, he was gone," she said of her horse. "It just breaks my heart."

How to prevent pigeon fever:

- Fly spray, sheets or repellents, as well as thorough manure cleanup, can limit the risk of disease.

- Fly control is particularly important if you have an infected horse on your property.

- Dispose of contaminated material or bedding used in treatment, clean stalls occupied by an infected horse and disinfect any equipment used on the horse.

- Wear gloves and charge your clothes before handling a healthy horse. The bacteria can be carried on equipment, clothes or human hands.

- Don't use the same pitchforks or equipment to remove manure from other stalls if they were used in the stall of an infected horse.

- When the abscesses are drained, remove the top layer of soil in the area
where the wound was drained, replacing it with clean soil.

- Disinfectants like bleach don't work well on dirt or manure.

- The Oregon Veterinary Medical Association recommends examining your horse daily for swelling.

[Byline: Ian Campbell]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Pigeon fever, pigeon breast, breastbone fever, dryland distemper, dryland strangles, false strangles, and false distemper are names by which this disease -- caused by the bacterium _Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis_ -- is most frequently known. Geographically, it was at one time considered to be a disease of California, where it is regarded as endemic. However, it is much more widespread now, especially in the western states of the USA, but it has a worldwide distribution. It is a seasonal disease, usually appearing in late fall, but it can appear sporadically at any time of year.

The signs of pigeon fever can also initially resemble those of other diseases such as strangles. Sometimes the only initial signs are lameness and a reluctance to move. It can strike a horse of any age, sex, or breed, but usually attacks young adult animals. There is a low incidence in foals.

It has also been diagnosed in cattle, and a similar disease affects sheep and goats. The disease is not transmissible to humans, although humans can carry the infectious agent on shoes, clothing, hands, or barn tools and transfer it to other animals.

Clinical signs include lameness, fever, lethargy, and weight loss, usually accompanied by very deep abscesses and multiple sores along the chest, midline, and groin area, and, sometimes, the back. Abscesses also can develop internally.

The disease is called pigeon fever because infected animals often develop abscesses in their pectoral muscles, which swell to make it resemble a pigeon's chest. Although the disease is considered seasonal, with most cases occurring in early fall, a number of cases have been confirmed during winter months and other times of the year as well.

The causative bacteria live in the soil and can enter the animal's body through wounds, broken skin, or through mucous membranes. In addition, some researchers believe pigeon fever may be transmitted by flies.

Of the types of disease (external abscesses, internal abscesses, or limb infection [ulcerative lymphangitis]), ulcerative lymphangitis is the commonest form worldwide and rarely involves more than one leg at a time. Usually, multiple small, draining sores develop above the fetlock.

The commonest form of the disease in the United States is external abscessation, which often forms deep in the muscles and can be very large. Usually, it appears in the pectoral region, the ventral abdomen, and the groin area. After spontaneous rupture, or lancing, the wound will exude liquid, light tan-colored, malodorous pus.

The commonest forms are external abscess and lymphangitis, with the prognosis of a full recovery being generally good. Internal abscesses can occur and are very difficult to treat.

The contagious nature of the disease means an accurate diagnosis is imperative, and treatment should be initiated as well as control of insects and the rigid practice of biosecurity.

Horse owners should be aware of the clinical signs and understand that veterinary care must be timely. Infected horses should be isolated, the abscesses properly treated, and the drainage properly disposed of. The area where the infected horse is kept must be properly cleaned and completely disinfected because this is a very hardy bacterium. Bacteria in the pus draining from abscesses on infected horses can survive from 1 to 55 days in the environment. They have also been shown to survive from 1 to 8 days on surface contaminants and from 7 to 55 days within feces, hay, straw, or wood shavings. Lower temperatures prolong the survival time.

Pest control is extremely important. The bacteria may be transported between animals by flies.

Horses may become infected but not develop abscesses for weeks. The disease usually manifests in younger horses but can occur in any age, sex, and breed.

A different biotype of the organism is responsible for a chronic contagious disease of sheep and goats, caseous lymphadenitis (CL). Either biotype can occur in cattle.

Treatment in horses often consists of hot packs or poultices applied to abscesses to encourage opening. Open abscesses should be drained and regularly flushed with saline solution. Surgical or deep lancing may be required, depending on the depth of the abscess or the thickness of the capsule, and should be done by your veterinarian. Ultrasound can aid in locating deep abscesses so that drainage can be accomplished. External abscesses can be cleaned with a 0.1 per cent povidone-iodine solution. Antiseptic-soaked gauze may be packed into the open wound. A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, such as phenylbutazone, can be used to control swelling and pain.

Antibiotics are controversial. Their use in these cases has sometimes been associated with chronic abscessation and, if inadequately used, may contribute to abscesses, according to one study. The most commonly used antibiotics for the treatment of this condition are procaine penicillin G, administered intramuscularly, or trimethoprim-sulfa. In the case of internal abscesses, prolonged penicillin therapy is necessary.

Buckets or other containers should be used to collect pus from draining abscesses, and this infectious material should be disposed of properly. Consistent and careful disposal of infected bedding, hay, straw, or other material used in the stall is vitally important. Thoroughly clean and disinfect stalls, paddocks, all utensils, and tack. Pest control for insects is also very important.

With treatment, recovery usually takes place between 2 weeks and 77 days. Although some animals may have recurrences, recovery is generally complete, and the prognosis is good.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from http://www.news.colostate.edu/Release/Print/2692. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3652907,3613.]
See Also
2014
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (AZ) 20140103.2148945
2013
----
Corynebacterium, equine - Canada (02): (AB) 20131010.1993654
Corynebacterium, equine - Canada: (AB) 20130926.1968236
2012
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (06): (KS): 20121227.1470759
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (05): (MO) 20121116.1411851
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (04): (FL) 20120706.1191802
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (03): (FL) 20120530.1149747
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (02): (OK) 20120202.1028113
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (TX) 20120118.1013774
2011
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (LA) 20111211.3566
2010
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (02): (FL) 20100528.1780
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (NV) 20100401.1047
2009
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA: (CO) 20090819.2934
2007
----
Pigeon fever, equine - USA (OR) 20071018.3408
2004
----
Corynebacterium, penguin - New Zealand (02) 20041222.3378
Corynebacterium, penguin - New Zealand 20041127.3171
2003
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) (03) 20030117.0143
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) (02) 20030112.0104
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Kentucky) 20030111.0096
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Colorado) 20030110.0085
2002
----
Corynebacterium, equine - USA (Wyoming) 20021125.5895
.................................................sb/tg/je/ml
</body>
