<header id=049580>
Published Date: 2019-02-19 04:15:27 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mycetoma: WHO conference, call for action
Archive Number: 20190219.6323872
</header>
<body id=049580>
MYCETOMA: WHO CONFERENCE, CALL FOR ACTION
*****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 15 Feb 2019
Source: WHO Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited]
https://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/news/Mycetoma-Global-conference-calls-for-action/en/


Delegates attending the 6th International Conference on Mycetoma in Khartoum, Sudan have endorsed a "Call for action" urging the global community to work together with multilateral agencies, partners, research institutions and pharmaceutical companies to address the devastating consequences of this disease.

Mycetoma, a neglected tropical disease, mainly affects poor, rural populations, particularly people of low economic status who walk barefoot and manual workers, such as agricultural laborourers and herdsmen. Reaching people in these underserved areas is crucial to achieving the 2030 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

"I am pleased to see this global conference shedding light on mycetoma, a disease that has been truly neglected and overlooked for too long, which has resulted in devastating consequences for poor and vulnerable populations," said Dr Ahmed Al-Mandhari, WHO Regional Director for the Eastern Mediterranean. "Tackling neglected tropical diseases is in line with our mandate to provide health care to everyone, everywhere."

Mycetoma commonly affects the legs and arms, causing intense suffering, loss of function and impaired ability to work to earn a living. "Sudan is committed to investing in a healthier environment to guarantee safer livestock and agricultural practices and to engaging with farmers and livestock herders to prevent injuries that can cause mycetoma," said His Excellency Al-Khair Al-Nour Al-Mubarak, Federal Minister of Health of Sudan. "Appropriate guidance and support are needed to raise awareness about mycetoma, including information on prevention and the need to seek early treatment of all suspected cases."

When diagnosed in its late stages, mycetoma can lead to amputation and permanent disability. "The suffering and disability caused by mycetoma have far greater consequences for families, socioeconomic lives and mental well-being as patients affected are often stigmatized," said Professor Ahmed Hassan Fahal, Director of the Mycetoma Research Centre in Khartoum, WHO's only collaborating centre on mycetoma. "Its global distribution and disabling consequences require adoption of bold new initiatives and approaches to ensure appropriate, early diagnosis and access to enhanced treatment."

Setting goals and milestones: Following the recognition of mycetoma as a neglected tropical disease by the 69th World Health Assembly in 2016 through the adoption of resolution WHA 69.21, global measures have been initiated, including an assessment of current policies and practices in 164 countries, a global consultation to identify priority areas of work and the establishment of a Global Mycetoma Working Group.

More work needs to be done, as little is known about the incidence and prevalence of mycetoma worldwide. Documented cases show that Sudan reports one of the highest numbers of cases in the world. Other countries with relatively high numbers that form part of the so-called mycetoma belt include the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chad, Ethiopia, India, Mauritania, Mexico, Senegal, Somalia and Yemen.

"It is important we set goals and milestones that can trigger collaborative research to develop the much-needed tools and medicines to simplify diagnosis and treatment," said Dr Mwelecele Malecela, Director, WHO Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases. "An essential 1st step could be to look at how we can integrate mycetoma interventions within primary health care delivery, particularly as part of measures targeting diseases that manifest primarily on the skin" (Ref. 1).

The mode of transmission of mycetoma is not fully elucidated. Treatment is long and costly, and outcomes are often unsatisfactory (Ref. 2), which discourages patients from reporting to health centres for care. Furthermore, no rapid diagnostic tests are available for use within the primary health care system.

Investigating a new antifungal: The global community is hopeful as the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi) investigates the efficacy of fosravuconazole, a medicine that could be used for treatment of mycetoma. If successful, it could provide a short, cost-effective therapeutic protocol and boost compliance with treatment for mycetoma. Until that happens, however, the only strategy to reduce the severity and consequences of mycetoma is through enhanced public awareness, early detection of cases, and continued care and treatment.

The 3-day conference in Khartoum, organized by the Government of Sudan and WHO, consists of plenary sessions, thematic sessions, group work and meet-the-experts sessions; an estimated 500 participants will review control activities, clinical aspects and research related to the disease.

1st global workshop: The 6th International Conference on Mycetoma was preceded by the 1st International Training Workshop on Mycetoma from 10 to 14 Feb 2019. The workshop was organized by WHO and the Mycetoma Research Centre with the support of DNDi.

More than 60 health staff from a wide range of countries endemic for mycetoma participated in discussions on standardizing practices on diagnosis, treatment, epidemiology and surveillance.

Mycetoma is characterized by disabling deformities and is associated with severe morbidity. It is a chronic, granulomatous, progressively destructive inflammatory disease of the skin, connective tissue, muscle and bone.

The disease results from infection caused by more than 70 microorganisms of bacterial or fungal origin. Mycetoma is classified as actinomycetoma (bacterial mycetoma) or eumycetoma (fungal mycetoma) based on its causative agent.

If not detected and managed early, mycetoma can cause gross deformity of the limbs and, in advanced cases, lead to amputation and death.

---------------------------
Ref 1. Also termed "skin NTDs," this proposed WHO approach focuses on diseases that present changes in the skin (through lumps or swelling, ulcers, swollen limbs and patches on the face or body). An integrated approach can offer opportunities for early detection of many of these conditions through active screening in communities and schools, including mycetoma, leprosy, scabies, cutaneous leishmaniasis, etc.

Ref 2. Currently used antifungals for eumycetoma such as ketoconazole and itraconazole are the only therapies available. However, they are expensive, ineffective and have serious side-effects.

Contact:
Mr Mohit Omid
EM/ERC (External Relations and Communications)
<mohito@who.int>

Mrs YASSIN, Mona Aly
EM/ERC (External Relations and Communications)
<yassinm@who.int>

Ashok Moloo
WHO/CDS/NTD
<molooa@who.intdworld>

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The following is extracted and abridged from the CDC (https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/mycetoma/index.html):
"Mycetoma is a disease caused by certain types of bacteria and fungi found in soil and water. These bacteria and fungi may enter the body through a break in the skin, often on the person's foot. The resulting infection causes firm, usually painless but debilitating masses under the skin that can eventually affect the underlying bone. Mycetoma can be caused by bacteria (actinomycetoma) or fungi (eumycetoma). The number of people with mycetoma worldwide is not known, but there were 8763 cases reported in a 2013 review of scientific articles between 1950 and 2013. The actual number of cases is likely substantially higher.

"Mycetoma affects people of all ages and is more common in men. This disease primarily affects poorer people in rural [equatorial] regions of Africa, Latin America, and Asia [known as the 'mycetoma belt' .... that] have dry climates. Mycetoma has rarely been reported in the United States in recent decades. A review of the literature from 1890 to 2014 showed fewer than 80 cases occurring in the US. Travelers from the United States to areas where mycetoma has been reported are at low risk of getting mycetoma. This is because developing mycetoma requires repeatedly exposing broken skin to soil and water that contain the microbes that cause mycetoma, over long periods of time, and travelers are unlikely to have enough exposure to be at risk.

"Diagnosis requires laboratory evaluation of a biopsy, or small tissue sample, of the infected area. The treatment for mycetoma includes antibiotics or antifungal medication, depending on which type of microbe is causing it, and surgery is sometimes needed to cut away the infected tissue. Wearing shoes might help prevent mycetoma.

"Symptoms are similar for bacterial and fungal mycetoma. Both appear as firm, painless masses under the skin. These masses usually appear on a person's foot but can form anywhere on the body. The mycetoma masses start small, but over time they can grow larger, develop oozing sores, and cause the affected limb to become deformed or unusable. If mycetoma is not treated or if treatment fails, it can spread to other areas of the body. Long-term mycetoma can eventually destroy the underlying muscle and bone.

"Fungal mycetoma (eumycetoma) is the most common type in Africa, while bacterial mycetoma (actinomycetoma) causes most cases in South and Central America and some Asian countries.

"Many people with mycetoma work in agricultural jobs, such as farmers and livestock herders.

"Early detection and treatment, before symptoms cause serious effects, can reduce disabilities from mycetoma and may cure the condition.

"It is not known why some people develop mycetoma and others do not, but aspects of the environment and living conditions are likely involved. Mycetoma does not spread between people.

"A culture (growing the bacteria or fungi in the laboratory) can determine the specific type of bacteria or fungus causing the infection. A doctor may also do an imaging test such as an X-ray or ultrasound to diagnose mycetoma and see how much damage has taken place to muscle and bone. Patients can avoid long-term infection and amputation by seeking care and detecting and treating mycetoma early.

"The treatment for mycetoma depends on whether it is caused by bacteria (actinomycetoma) or fungi (eumycetoma). Actinomycetoma is usually treatable with antibiotics, and surgery is usually not needed. Eumycetoma is usually treated with long-term antifungal medication, but treatment may not be completely effective. In this case, surgery or amputation are sometimes needed to cut away the infection tissue." - Mod.ML
]

.................................................sb/ml/msp/ml
</body>
