<header id=037048>
Published Date: 2020-12-16 02:47:55 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Chronic wasting disease - North America (05): USA (OH) deer
Archive Number: 20201216.8021541
</header>
<body id=037048>
CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE - NORTH AMERICA (05): USA (OHIO) DEER
*************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 14 dec 2020 7:58 PM EST
Source: Fox 19 News [edited]
https://www.fox19.com/2020/12/14/first-confirmed-case-chronic-wasting-disease-found-wild-ohio-deer-odnr-says/


The 1st positive case of chronic wasting disease has been reported in Ohio, according to the Ohio Department of Natural Resources (ODNR).

The positive test came from a white-tailed deer in Wyandot County northwest of Columbus.

The deer was shot by a hunter on private property, ODNR says. Tissue samples submitted by a taxidermist returned a positive result [10 Dec 2020].

CWD is a fatal neurological disease affecting white-tailed deer and other similar species such as mule deer, elk, and moose, ODNR says. Its signs include drastic weight loss (wasting), stumbling, listlessness, and other neurologic symptoms. The disease is fatal, and there is no known treatment or vaccine, according to the Centers for Disease Control.

There is no strong evidence CWD is transmissible to humans, ODNR says citing the CDC.

The CDC says of the disease's transmission:
"Once introduced into an area or farm, the CWD [mis-folded] protein is contagious within deer and elk populations and can spread quickly. Experts believe CWD prions can remain in the environment for a long time, so other animals can contract CWD from the environment even after an infected deer or elk has died."

ODNR's Division of Wildlife will now implement a response plan including mandatory disease sampling and enhanced surveillance within a 10-mile radius of the positive case.

The case is Ohio's first since the Division of Wildlife began routine surveillance testing for CWD in 2002. More than 25 000 tests were returned negative without finding the disease in a wild herd, ODNR says, though CWD has been detected in captive deer breeding facilities in Ohio.

CWD has been found in 26 states and 4 Canadian provinces.

The disease was first discovered in the 1960s in the western US.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This is rather sad as Ohio has been free of chronic wasting disease (CWD) in their wild herd for many years. But somehow once they found it in captive deer it was bound to happen in wild deer.

"CWD is an always fatal, contagious, neurological disease affecting deer species (including reindeer), elk, and moose. It causes a characteristic spongy degeneration of the brains of infected animals resulting in emaciation, abnormal behavior, loss of bodily functions, and death.

"CWD belongs to a group of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). Within the TSE family, there are several diseases that affect domestic animals including scrapie, which has been identified in domestic sheep and goats for more than 200 years; bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle (also known as "mad cow disease"); and transmissible mink encephalopathy in farmed mink.

"Several rare human diseases are TSEs. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) occurs naturally in about one out of every one million people worldwide. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (v-CJD) has been associated with contaminated beef consumption during the large-scale BSE outbreak in cattle herds in Great Britain.

"The most widely accepted theory is that the CWD agent is a misfolded prion, an abnormal form of a cellular protein that is most commonly found in the central nervous system and lymphoid tissue. The abnormal prion "infects" the host animal by promoting conversion of normal cellular prion protein to the abnormal form. As a protein, the CWD agent does not contain any genetic material (DNA or RNA) as occurs with bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic disease agents.

"The CWD infectious agent is smaller than most viral particles and does not evoke any detectable immune response or inflammatory reaction in the host animal. Like the abnormal prions that cause other TSEs, the CWD agent is highly resistant to enzymes, chemicals, heat and other materials or procedures that typically are used to inactivate disease agents.

"Several species of the deer family (cervids) are known to be naturally susceptible to CWD: elk, mule deer, white-tailed deer, reindeer (caribou), red deer, and moose. Captive Sika deer, captive red deer, and captive Sitka/red deer hybrids in South Korea have reportedly contracted CWD from infected captive elk imported from Saskatchewan. Susceptibility of additional cervids and other wildlife species is not entirely known, although ongoing research is further exploring this question. Surveillance in areas with heavily infected wild cervid populations has failed to detect CWD in any mammalian predators or scavengers.

"Most animals infected with CWD appear clinically normal. This is because the minimal incubation period between infection and the onset of signs of clinical disease is approximately 16 months. The maximal incubation period is unknown, as is the point at which shedding of the CWD agent in feces, saliva, and urine begins during the prolonged incubation period. While yearlings and fawns can contract the disease, late-stage signs of CWD are usually only visible in adult animals because of the disease's prolonged incubation period. In most cases, animals with CWD show no visible signs of the disease for all but the last few months of the disease's cycle. Thus, the majority of infected animals appear healthy and are impossible to distinguish from uninfected animals. Because CWD affects the central nervous system of infected animals, other causes of mortality (predators, vehicle collisions, other diseases) often remove infected animals from the population before outward signs of the disease become apparent. This is one reason that sick or dead animals with typical signs of CWD are found only occasionally by hunters, wildlife watchers, and the public.

"If an infected animal survives to the final stage of this always-fatal disease, the most obvious and consistent clinical sign is emaciation. CWD-affected animals continue to eat but amounts of feed consumed are reduced, leading to gradual loss of body condition. Excessive drinking and urination also are common in the terminal stages.

"Behavioral changes also occur in the majority of cases of late-stage CWD, including decreased interactions with other animals, listlessness, lowering of the head, blank facial expression, and repetitive walking in circles or other set patterns. In elk, behavioral changes may also include hyper-excitability and nervousness. Excessive salivation, drooling, and grinding of the teeth also are observed.

"It is important to note that the above-mentioned clinical signs alone are not sufficient to definitively diagnose CWD. There are other maladies that can have signs that mimic those of CWD such as brain abscesses, brain worm in elk, trauma-related injuries, or other diseases such as epizootic hemorrhagic disease. Currently, the only conclusive diagnosis for CWD involves examination and testing of the brain, tonsils and/or lymph nodes after death.

"Clinical signs and visible lesions of CWD alone are not conclusive, and currently there is no practical live animal test. A definitive diagnosis is based on examination of the brain for the characteristic microscopic spongiform lesions and/or accumulation of the CWD-associated prion protein in brain and lymphoid tissues using a technique called immunohistochemistry. Gross lesions seen at necropsy reflect the clinical signs of CWD, primarily emaciation. Aspiration pneumonia, which may be the actual cause of death, also is a common finding in animals affected with CWD.

"Research to develop live-animal diagnostic tests for CWD is an area of intense interest. Tests currently can be conducted on biopsy samples of lymphoid tissue from tonsils, lymph nodes, and rectal mucosa of live deer and elk, but this is not practical on a large-scale basis for free-ranging populations. In addition, these tests are currently not as accurate at detecting infected animals when compared to testing samples from dead deer and elk.

"CWD poses serious problems for wildlife managers, hunters, wildlife watchers, and the implications for free-ranging deer and elk are significant:
- Heavily infected populations of wild deer and elk are unlikely to thrive, and negative population-level impacts of CWD have been well documented in deer and elk.
- Where it occurs, CWD usually alters the management of wild deer and elk populations, particularly harvest regulations.
- Ongoing surveillance programs are expensive and divert resources from other wildlife management needs.
- Minimizing human exposure to CWD appears prudent.
- Ultimately, public and agency concerns and perceptions about human health risks may erode hunters' confidence and their willingness to hunt in areas where CWD occurs.

"Efforts to address CWD are accelerating rapidly. Below are only a few of the efforts currently underway:
- The Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (AFWA), which represents all 50 state fish and wildlife management agencies, developed and approved best management practices for CWD in 2018. Science-based tools recommended by AFWA include, but are not limited to, regulation of live cervid and carcass movements, prohibition of activities that artificially congregate susceptible species, targeted removal, hunting, surveillance and monitoring, and public education.
- Many states have developed science-based CWD surveillance, response, and/or management plans and made them available on their websites.
- Several state wildlife agencies aggressively collect and test wild elk and deer for the presence of CWD, and have instituted surveillance programs to examine hunter-harvested deer and elk.
- Selective and localized culling of animals suspected to have been exposed to CWD is or has been practiced by some states to slow transmission of the disease.
- Some state wildlife agencies have adopted regulations that prohibit transportation of intact, hunter-harvested cervid carcasses or high-risk carcass parts out of CWD-affected areas.
- The use or sale of natural, urine-based hunting lures has been banned in some states due to concerns that these products could be contaminated with the CWD agent and/or cause unnatural congregation of wild cervids.
- Many states allow importation only of boned out meat, quarters (without spinal column or head), processed venison, cleaned skull plates and antlers, and taxidermy specimens, etc. from CWD-affected areas or from all out-of-state locations.
- Several states have implemented moratoriums on the importation of live cervids. Some states have also halted intra-state movement of live deer and elk and banned supplemental and baiting feeding programs.
- CWD surveillance of captive cervid farming operations is voluntary unless herd owners wish to ship animals interstate in which case participation in a cooperative State/Federal (USDA-APHIS-Veterinary Services) Herd Certification Program (HCP) is mandatory. Currently, CWD testing of all cervids older than one year of age that die on site for five years without detection of an infected animal, as well as fencing, inventory and other requirements must be met prior to certification to ship animals interstate. When CWD is detected in a captive cervid facility, that facility typically is quarantined, and a herd plan is adopted that may or may not include destruction of all captive cervids in the facility.
- Research is being conducted to develop better techniques for prevention, detection, and management as well as the social implications of CWD management.
- Federal funding is being sought to develop or enhance CWD-related research, management, and public information/education."

Extracted from: http://cwd-info.org/faq/. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map of Ohio: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8021541,66338
Ohio county map: https://www.mapsofworld.com/usa/states/ohio/ohio-county-map.html]
See Also
Chronic wasting disease - North America (04): USA (MT) deer 20201212.8013872
Chronic wasting disease - North America (03): USA (IA) Canada (research) 20200212.6983378
Chronic wasting disease - North America (02): mode of spread 20200119.6898566
Chronic wasting disease - North America (01): USA (MI,MT) deer, moos, 2019 20200118.6897410
2019
----
Chronic wasting disease - USA (21): (MT) moose 20191231.6865213
Chronic wasting disease - USA (20): (TX) wild deer 20191221.6852069
Chronic wasting disease - USA (19): (MT) wild elk 20191214.6841085
Chronic wasting disease - USA (18): (TN) deer 20191123.6793739
Chronic wasting disease - USA (17): (ND) mule deer 20191023.6741695
Chronic wasting disease - USA (16): (WY) mule deer 20191006.6711774
Chronic wasting disease - USA (15): new research, comments 20190915.6675477
Chronic wasting disease - USA (14): new research 20190913.6671713
Chronic wasting disease - USA (13): (WI) elk 20190828.6644590
Chronic wasting disease - USA (12): possible genetic predisposition 20190609.6511538
Chronic wasting disease - USA (11): (MT) deer 20190601.6497959
Chronic wasting disease - USA (10): (VA) deer 20190420.6433133
Chronic wasting disease - USA (09): (SD) captive elk 20190326.6388782
Chronic wasting disease - USA (08): (MS) deer 20190318.6374364
Chronic wasting disease - USA (07): (MN) deer 20190313.6364182
.................................................sb/tg/mj/lxl
</body>
