<header id=036071>
Published Date: 2012-03-16 19:55:50 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed illness, children - India (02):(JK) Wilson's disease
Archive Number: 20120316.1072848
</header>
<body id=036071>
UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS, CHILDREN - INDIA(02):(JAMMU & KASHMIR) WILSON'S DISEASE
****************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 3 Mar 2012
Source: Rising Kashmir [edited]
http://www.risingkashmir.com/news/rare-disease-grips-kupwara-village-23072.aspx


Rare disease grips Kupwara village
----------------------------------
State IDSP lab unable to check metal content of water

People of Tumina village of north Kashmir's Kupwara district are worried with at least 5 local children, including a class 10 girl student, catching a rare disease.

Authorities are yet to come out with a report of water samples they took a week back from the village wells to ascertain the copper content. When contacted, State Nodal Officer Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP), Dr Rehana told Rising Kashmir that the state IDSP lab is not able to check even the metal content of the water. She added that the disease is not water borne.

Some of the symptoms shown by the affected people are: abnormal posture of arms and legs, difficulty in moving arms and legs, impairment of speech, shaking arms or hands, uncontrollable movement and weakness.

Based on the symptoms, experts declared that it was a rare disease called Wilson's disease. The disease, according to them, causes the body to take in and keep too much of copper.

"The deposits of copper cause tissue damage, which causes the affected organs to stop working properly," they say.

Suffering from speech and limb impairment, Rizwan Farooq (10) of Sarpanch Mohall Tumina has been discharged untreated from neurology department of SKIMS Soura a fortnight ago while as Danish Mehmood (11) of Haji Mohala Tumina, suffering from uncontrolled movement and weakness for the past 10 days, is presently receiving treatment at SKIMS.

While declaring the disease as Wilsons' Disease, diagnostic reports received from Lal Path Labs Delhi has revealed 99.22 per cent copper rate in the body of one of the patients, which as per the physicians can lead to permanent disability.

A team from department of communication and capacity development unit in association with WENTEP declared water of the village wells unfit for drinking purposes owing to overconcentration of ammonia, and iron content and unpleasant taste/odor of the water.

IDSP was launched by Union Minister of Health & Family Welfare in November 2004. It is a decentralized, State based Surveillance Program in the country. It is intended to detect early warning signals of impending outbreaks and help initiate an effective response in a timely manner.

Major components of the project are : (1) Integrating and decentralization of surveillance activities; (2) Strengthening of public health laboratories; (3) Human Resource Development - Training of State Surveillance Officers, District Surveillance Officers, Rapid Response Team, other medical and paramedical staff; and (4) Use of Information Technology for collection, collation, compilation, analysis and dissemination of data.

Tumina residents allege that the PHE department throw bore wells open for public in the village without checking copper content of the water.

A local physician, wishing not to be named, suggested that the health department should carry out intensive and mass surveillance of the local populace so that the disease could be controlled as quickly as possible.

As the health department has prohibited use of bore well water, locals in the absence of water, boil snow piled in their backyards for drinking purpose.

MLA Kupwara, Mir Saifullah lashed out at health authorities for "half hearted" measures. Questioning the delay in the IDSP report, he demanded that an expert team of doctors be sent to the area to carry out extensive examination of whole population immediately.

He also demanded alternative water supply for the locality.

Meanwhile, CMO Kupwara assured that a team of doctors will visit the area soon to take stock of the situation.
--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly <a href="mailto:ronankelly@comcast.net">ronankelly@comcast.net</a>


[Wilson's disease is a genetic disorder that prevents the body from getting rid of extra copper. A small amount of copper obtained from food is needed to stay healthy, but too much copper is poisonous. In Wilson's disease, copper builds up in the liver, brain, eyes, and other organs. Over time, high copper levels can cause life-threatening organ damage.

People who get Wilson's disease inherit two abnormal copies of the ATP7B gene, one from each parent. Wilson's disease carriers, who have only one copy of the abnormal gene, do not have symptoms. Most people with Wilson's disease have no known family history of the disease. A person's chances of having Wilson's disease increase if one or both parents have it.

About one in 40,000 people get Wilson's disease.(1) It affects men and women equally. Symptoms usually appear between ages 5 to 35, but new cases have been reported in people aged 2 to 72 years.

Wilson's disease is caused by a buildup of copper in the body. Normally, copper from the diet is filtered out by the liver and released into bile, which flows out of the body through the gastrointestinal tract. People who have Wilson disease cannot release copper from the liver at a normal rate, due to a mutation of the ATP7B gene. When the copper storage capacity of the liver is exceeded, copper is released into the bloodstream and travels to other organs—including the brain, kidneys, and eyes.
Wilson's disease first attacks the liver, the central nervous system, or both.
A buildup of copper in the liver may cause ongoing liver disease. Rarely, acute liver failure occurs; most patients develop signs and symptoms that accompany chronic liver disease, including: swelling of the liver or spleen, jaundice, or yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes, fluid buildup in the legs or abdomen, a tendency to bruise easily, fatigue

A buildup of copper in the central nervous system may result in neurologic symptoms, including: problems with speech, swallowing, or physical coordination, tremors or uncontrolled movements, muscle stiffness, behavioral changes,

Other signs and symptoms of Wilson's disease include: anemia, low platelet or white blood cell count, slower blood clotting, measured by a blood test, high levels of amino acids, protein, uric acid, and carbohydrates in urine, premature osteoporosis and arthritis

Kayser-Fleischer rings result from a buildup of copper in the eyes and are the most unique sign of Wilson's disease. They appear in each eye as a rusty-brown ring around the edge of the iris and in the rim of the cornea. The iris is the colored part of the eye surrounding the pupil. The cornea is the transparent outer membrane that covers the eye.

Wilson's disease is diagnosed through a physical examination and laboratory tests.
During the physical examination, a doctor will look for visible signs of Wilson disease. A special light called a slit lamp is used to look for Kayser-Fleischer rings in the eyes. Kayser-Fleischer rings are present in almost all people with Wilson's disease who show signs of neurologic damage but are present in only 50 percent of those with signs of liver damage alone.

Laboratory tests measure the amount of copper in the blood, urine, and liver tissue. Most people with Wilson disease will have a lower than normal level of copper in the blood and a lower level of corresponding ceruloplasmin, a protein that carries copper in the bloodstream. In cases of acute liver failure caused by Wilson disease, the level of blood copper is often higher than normal. A 24-hour urine collection will show increased copper in the urine in most patients who display symptoms. A liver biopsy—a procedure that removes a small piece of liver tissue—can show if the liver is retaining too much copper. The analysis of biopsied liver tissue with a microscope detects liver damage, which often shows a pattern unique to Wilson disease.

Genetic testing may help diagnose Wilson's disease in some people, particularly those with a family history of the disease.

Wilson's disease can be misdiagnosed because it is rare and its symptoms are similar to those of other conditions.

Wilson's disease requires lifelong treatment to reduce and control the amount of copper in the body.

Initial therapy includes the removal of excess copper, a reduction of copper intake, and the treatment of any liver or central nervous system damage.

The drugs d-penicillamine (Cuprimine) and trientine hydrochloride (Syprine) release copper from organs into the bloodstream. Most of the copper is then filtered out by the kidneys and excreted in urine. A potential major side effect of both drugs is that neurologic symptoms can become worse—a possible result of the newly released copper becoming reabsorbed by the central nervous system. About 20 to 30 percent of patients using d-penicillamine will also initially experience other reactions to the medication, including fever, rash, and other drug-related effects on the kidneys and bone marrow. The risk of drug reaction and neurologic worsening appears to be lower with trientine hydrochloride, which should be the first choice for the treatment of all symptomatic patients.

Pregnant women should take a lower dose of d-penicillamine or trientine hydrochloride during pregnancy to reduce the risk of birth defects. A lower dose will also help reduce the risk of slower wound healing if surgical procedures are performed during childbirth.

Zinc, administered as zinc salts such as zinc acetate (Galzin), blocks the digestive tract’s absorption of copper from food. Zinc removes copper too slowly to be used alone as an initial therapy for people who already have symptoms, but it is often used in combination with d-penicillamine or trientine hydrochloride. Zinc is safe to use at full dosage during pregnancy.

Maintenance therapy begins when symptoms improve and tests show that copper has been reduced to a safe level. Maintenance therapy typically includes taking zinc and low doses of either d-penicillamine or trientine hydrochloride. Blood and urine should be monitored by a health care provider to ensure treatment is keeping copper at a safe level.

People with Wilson's disease should reduce their dietary copper intake. They should not eat shellfish or liver, as these foods may contain high levels of copper. Other foods high in copper—including mushrooms, nuts, and chocolate—should be avoided during initial therapy but, in most cases, may be eaten in moderation during maintenance therapy. People with Wilson disease should have their drinking water checked for copper content and should not take multivitamins that contain copper.
If the disorder is detected early and treated effectively, people with Wilson disease can enjoy good health.

Wilson's disease is a very treatable condition. With proper therapy, disease progress can be halted and oftentimes symptoms can be improved. Treatment is aimed at removing excess accumulated copper and preventing its reaccumulation. Treatment for Wilson's disease is a lifelong process. Patients may become progressively sicker from day to day, so immediate treatment can be critical. Treatment delays may cause irreversible damage.

Chelation therapy drugs approved for treating Wilson's disease include penicillamine (Cuprimine® and Depen®) and trientine (Syprine® and Trientine Dihydrochloride) Both of these drugs act by chelation or binding of copper, causing its increased urinary excretion.

Mettalothionein inducer drugs approved for treating Wilson disease are (Galzin™) in the USA and (Wilzin®) in Europe. Zinc acts by blocking the absorption of copper in the intestinal tract. This action both depletes accumulated copper and prevents its reaccumulation. Zinc's effectiveness has been shown by more than 30 years of considerable experience overseas. A major advantage of zinc therapy is its lack of side effects.

This is generally a type of genetic disease, so it is difficult to understand how so many people in the village are having the same clinical signs. If it is truly Wilson’s disease, then one explanation would be those having clinical signs probably have the autosomal recessive gene, which may mean the genetic diversity within this population is not very great [due to inbreeding].

It would be important to have the water and other dietary local staples checked for copper, but equally important is to rule out other causes of hepatic cirrhosis.

A Kayser-Fleischer Ring may be seen at: http://www.wilsonsdisease.org/wilson-disease/kayserfleischerrings.php

Portions of this comment have been extracted from:
http://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/wilson/ and http://www.wilsonsdisease.org/wilson-disease/wilsondisease-treatment.php


References:
(1)Olivarez M, Caggana M, Pass KA, Ferguson P, Brewer GJ. Estimate of the frequency of Wilson's disease in the US Caucasian population: a mutation analysis approach. Annals of Human Genetics. 2001;65:459–463. -- Mod.TG]
See Also
Undiagnosed illness, children - India (JK) RFI 20120316.1072361
.................................................tg/jw
</body>
