<header id=003949>
Published Date: 2018-11-02 20:05:52 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Congenital abnormalities - France: limb defects, investigation
Archive Number: 20181103.6124711
</header>
<body id=003949>
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES - FRANCE: LIMB DEFECTS, INVESTIGATION
**************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 4 Oct 2018
Source: Public Health France/ Sante Publique France [edited]
https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/Accueil-Presse/Tous-les-communiques/Surveillance-des-anomalies-congenitales


The press echoes reported cases of agenesis of upper limbs in Ain. Two other situations of a similar nature have been reported in Brittany and Pays-de-Loire. Public Health France conducted an epidemiological investigation of these 3 reports that it makes public today [4 Oct 2018].

In order to monitor congenital anomalies, Public Health France coordinates a network of 6 registers covering 19 percent of births in France and contributes to their financing. As part of its mission, the malformations register in Rhone-Alpes (REMERA) informed the agency of 7 cases grouped in the Ain. Public Health France systematically studies these reports with a standardized protocol in order to determine whether this is due to chance and to identify any common exposures. The approach is as follows:

- A 1st check is made to learn if [the cases] are identical and share the same clinical definition.
- Then, the frequency of malformation in the study area is compared to that over the entire territory to check whether or not there is an excess of cases.
- In addition to this statistical analysis, the agency conducts with the registry a survey of the mothers of each of the cases reported, asking the mothers about their lifestyle during pregnancy and especially during the 1st trimester. The objective is to seek a possible common exposure to these cases (taking drugs, environmental exposure, etc.).

Today [4 Oct 2018], following the investigation of the 7 cases reported in Ain born between 2009 and 2014, the statistical analysis does not show an excess of cases compared to the national average, and Public Health France has not identified a common exposure to the occurrence of these malformations. The absence of a hypothesis of a possible common cause does not make it possible to direct further investigations.

The Agency has also conducted similar investigations on 2 reports of agenesis of upper limbs that occurred in Loire Atlantique (3 cases born between 2007 and 2008) and in Brittany (4 cases born between 2011 and 2013). For the Loire Atlantique and Brittany, the investigation concluded an excess of cases. However, no common exposure was identified for the clustered cases of these 2 regions.

In this context, the agency maintains with the French network of registers a particular attention to the occurrence of new cases in these regions and in the rest of France.

The registry of congenital malformations in the Rhone Alpes. Remera, is one of 6 congenital malformation registries existing in the national territory collecting these morphological anomalies, and one of the 4 registers in mainland France. It is an epidemiological surveillance tool in terms of public health.

The surveillance of congenital malformations and the investigations are particularly complex, especially because of the rarity of the events. In response to a request from the general directorate of health, Public Health France with ANSM proposed the constitution of a federation of 6 registers on a common operating basis, as well as their evolution with particular matching with the data of the National Health Data System [NSDS]. The report is available on the website of Public Health France. A reflection is underway on the basis of this report with the directorate general of health.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2]
Date: Wed 31 Oct 2018
Source: Xinhua [edited]
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-10/31/c_137572541.htm


French health minister Agnes Buzyn announced Wednesday [31 Oct 2018] that public health authorities would investigate dozens of cases of babies born either without arms or malformed ones in rural parts of the country.

"Following the alert, I asked for a new investigation," the minister told BFMTV news channel, adding that the 1st conclusions of the probing would be unveiled by the end of January 2019. "We have asked to have the entire (results) of the inquiry before [June 2019]. The complexity is to go back in the history of these families on cases that sometimes date from more than 10 years ago."

Earlier this week [week of 29 Oct 2018], public health authorities announced there had been an additional 11 cases reported in the Ain department of eastern France between 2000 and 2014. Similar incidents have already been unveiled in Brittany and the Loire-Atlantique areas. Last week [week of 22 Oct 2018], the health minister announced a new inquiry into the birth defects of 14 babies born since 2007.

"I want to know; I think all of France wants to know. We have to know where these women carried out their pregnancy, if it was in the department, or if it was elsewhere," Buzyn said. "We do not want to close any tracks. It's possibly an environmental cause. Maybe it's what they ate, what they drank, what they breathed. Today, I do not know."

Public Health France and the national agency for health security, ANSES, that jointly conducted the probe "have to go back to the mothers to try to understand the common points that could exist between all these families," Buzyn added.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[3]
Date: Wed 31 Oct 2018
Source: Local France [edited]
https://www.thelocal.fr/20181004/the-story-behind-the-high-number-of-babies-in-france-born-without-arms


France has launched a nationwide investigation into several cases of babies being born with missing or deformed arms in rural France after abnormal rates of deformations were detected in several regions of the country. Here's what we know about the situation so far.

On Tuesday [30 Oct 2018], 11 new cases of babies being born with missing or deformed arms were identified through hospital records in the Ain area, near the Swiss border; [these babies were born] between 2000 and 2014.

This was the latest development in a situation that started coming to public attention back in early October [2018] when several reports of an unusually high number of similar cases were reported in the Ain department of eastern France, Brittany on the west coast, and Loire-Atlantique, south of Brittany. Those reports revealed that 7 babies had been born without arms or hands between 2009 and 2014, all within 17 km [10.6 mi] of the village of Druillat in the Ain department in eastern France (plot 1 on the map at the source URL).

Meanwhile, in the town of Mouzeil in the western Loire-Atlantique department (plot 2 on the map at the source URL), a total of 3 children were born with the same birth defects between the years of 2007 and 2008.

And in 2015, Guidel, a town in Brittany (plot 3 on the map at the source URL), was identified as a new area of concern after a doctor, and mother of one of the 3 babies born between 2011 and 2013 with the same medical problems, alerted the authorities.

After the new incidents came to light, Francois Bourdillon, head of the Public Health France agency, told RTL radio that the probe was "underway," and the results would be known "in about 3 months. We will look at all suspect cases," he said.

The national health agency had previously conducted an investigation, the results of which were revealed at the beginning of October [2018] when it admitted for the 1st time that the situations in Loire-Atlantique and Brittany revealed an excessive number of these kinds of cases. However, at that point, the agency said it did not believe that the evidence suggested there has been an excessive level of cases in Ain and that there would be no further investigation.

Even without the 11 new cases, some scientists, who 1st picked up on the worrying trend in 2011, had said that the number of cases in Ain was 58 times the normal amount.

The phenomenon, which some have labelled a "health scandal," remains unexplained. However, Remera, a public body that looks into cases of malformation, conducted an investigation into the situation in the Ain department, interviewing the mothers to see if there were any factors linking them and their pregnancies.

After speaking to the parents, doctors dismissed genetics as well as drugs and drink as possible causes for the deformations. "We interviewed all the mothers with a very extensive questionnaire on their lifestyle. The only thing they have in common is that they all live in a very rural area," Emmanuelle Amar, director of Remera in the southeast of France, said.

While the cause of the defects is unknown, research has shown that exposure of the mother to certain chemicals or medication during the pregnancy can increase the risk.

Last week, Buzyn told French news channel LCI that environmental experts would join health experts in investigating the cases to try to shed light on the phenomenon.

There is currently no register of babies born with deformities such as those seen in these cases. Instead there are just a few regional registers in the Rhone-Alpes, Brittany, and the West Indies that provide this kind of data.

Sante Publique France claims that an average of 150 babies are born each year around France with these kinds of birth defects; however, this figure is actually based on incomplete data that takes into account only 19 percent of France.

The medical community in France is divided about the most likely explanation of these cases. When it revealed the results of its 1st investigation in early October [2018], France's public health authority, Sante Publique France, said "the statistical analysis does not highlight an excess of cases compared to the national average," referring directly to the cases in the Ain department.

"We have not identified a common exposure to the occurrence of these malformations," said the director of the health body, Francois Bourdillon.

According to Anne Gallay, another of the directors at Sante Publique France, for the Loire-Atlantique and Brittany, the investigation concludes that there has been an excess of cases, but "no common exposure was identified for the clustered cases of these 2 regions. We listened to their parents and their grandparents, visited the places where they live. No environmental factors -- pesticides, for example -- could be questioned."

At that point, the organisation has described the situation as "tragic" for the people involved, but for the moment suggests there is no explanation.

Previously the body had said that the cases were probably "down to chance."

However, on the other side of the argument, Remera has dismissed the likelihood of it being down to a chance occurrence as "more than infinitesimal."

According to doctors at Remera, the most likely cause behind this extraordinarily unusual situation is the agricultural industry, meaning pesticides. Not least because, at the same time as these cases took place among the human population in the Ain department, several calves were born without a tail and missing ribs in Chalamont, another village in the department.

"It is believed that this revolves around agriculture," said Amar. "We have the elements, the data on these cases, but we need to bring the scientists together. For example, an ecotoxicologist (someone specialising on the effects of toxic chemicals on biological organisms) must work on it and determine which is the most appropriate study," she said. "We are definitely facing an excess of cases. We have the scientific and moral obligation to go further."

Unsurprisingly, the parents of these children want answers.

One of the mothers concerned has questioned if "it could be environmental." In her interview with FranceInfo, she mentioned "fertilizers, pesticides" and said "there may have been something that happened at this time in the town."

"I am outraged that no investigation has yet been launched," said another mother of one of the babies born in Ain. "We have the means in France to investigate the causes of these malformations," she continued. "They must try to give us answers rather than cover up the case. We are impressed by our son. He never asks for help. But since he started at school, some of his friends ask him questions or make fun of him, and he tells us he wants a hand. It is important for us to understand what may have happened during my pregnancy and to be able to answer him one day."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[4]
Date: Wed 31 Oct 2018
Source: Reuters [edited]
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-france-health-babies/france-investigates-reports-of-babies-born-without-arms-in-rural-areas-idUSKCN1N51MV


France has launched a nationwide investigation into why some 2 dozen babies have been born without hands or arms since 2000 in a handful of rural areas after several new cases were reported this week [week of 29 Oct 2018], the health minister said on Wednesday [31 Oct 2018].

A separate investigation has also been opened into reports that calves and possibly chickens have been born without limbs in the same 3 heavily agricultural areas, an official told Reuters.

Public health agency Sante Publique France said it had identified 11 additional cases of babies born with limb defects between 2000 and 2014 in the rural Ain department of eastern France, near the Swiss border, where 7 cases were already reported in 2009-2014.

There have also been malformed births in 2 departments in western France: 4 in the Morbihan, Brittany, area between 2011-2013, and 3 in neighboring Loire-Atlantique in 2007 and 2008. Ain and Morbihan are several hundred kilometers apart.

The reports have raised alarm among the French public that some kind of toxin in food, water, or air could be responsible.

"I want to know; I think all of France wants to know," health minister Agnes Buzyn told BFM TV. "It could be an environmental factor. Maybe it is due to what these women ate, drank, or breathed in."

An initial inquiry in early October [2018] found the incidence of limb defects in the affected regions to be no greater than elsewhere in the country, but now the probe has widened.

The new inquiry will be run jointly by the health agency and the sanitation, food, and environment agency, Buzyn said. "It is very complicated; we need to investigate the history of families in cases that sometimes date back 10 years or more," she said.

1st conclusions were due by 31 Jan [2019] and a full report by June [2019].

Epidemiologist Emmanuelle Amar, who 1st revealed the birth defects in Ain, told Reuters the only thing mothers of the affected babies had in common was that they lived in cereal-growing areas amid fields of corn and sunflower. She said most of the defects had been reported between 2009 and 2014, and since then, there had been no new cases. She criticized the health ministry's initial findings and said congenital defects in the affected regions had been way higher than what would normally be expected. "It is a terrible tragedy for the families," said Amar.

The parents of a girl born without forearms in the village of Guidel, in the Morbihan, said the inquiry should focus on the 2011-2013 period, when most of the cases appeared.

"No point in looking ahead. Focus on what happened then," the girl's father told BFM TV earlier this month [October 2018].

Amar said that in the Ain region, farmers had also reported calves being born without tails and without flanks. [Without flanks? According to the Free Dictionary, the flank is (1) the section of flesh on the body of a person or an animal between the last rib and the hip; the side, or (2) a cut of meat from the flank of an animal (see https://www.thefreedictionary.com/flank). So is the animal missing a muscle or fleshing connection? - Mod.TG]

An official at national food safety agency ANSES told Reuters it had now opened a separate investigation into legless calves in the 3 same regions. Poultry may also be investigated, as there are suspicions about chickens being affected.

Hospital registries show limb defects occur in 1.7 of every 10 000 births, or about 150 cases per year in France. Birth defects can have multiple causes, including chromosome disorders, drug use, or exposure to toxic substances.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, about 10 000 babies worldwide were born with malformed or missing limbs after their mothers received the drug thalidomide to treat morning sickness.

[Byline: Geert De Clercq]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[What an unusual set of circumstances! One has to wonder what might turn up if investigators start looking at food for both the animals and the people. Have grain crops been treated with pre-emergents or pesticides, or were they genetically altered in some fashion, possibly causing a birth defect when the grains or food from those grains are consumed at a specific time in pregnancy?

The last article mentions the thalidomide cases of the late 1950s and early 1960s. But the article does not tell us if this drug was or has been used recently, even under other some other name.

Some plants have only teratogenic capabilities when consumed during certain days of gestation. For example, _Veratrum californicum_ (common name false hellebore, or veratrum, and sometimes called wild corn or cow cabbage or even skunk cabbage). False hellebore poisoning may occur in 2-3 hours after an animal eats the plant. Sheep may show slight or marked signs of poisoning after eating 150-300 grams [5.3-10.6 oz] of green stems or leaves. If pregnant ewes eat false hellebore on the 14th day after breeding, the young may have congenital deformities of the head. These offspring, commonly called monkey-faced lambs, may have a protruding lower jaw, underdeveloped upper jaw, proboscis-like nose, cyclopia, hydrocephaly, and a variety of other deformities of the eyes. When ewes eat the plant between days 17-19, the ewes give birth to lambs having tracheal stenosis. Ewes consuming veratrum between days 28-31 give birth to lambs having shortened metatarsal and metacarpal bones. Ewes carrying severely deformed fetuses may fail to lamb at the end of the normal gestation period. The fetus thus continues to grow to an abnormal size and eventually may kill the ewe unless the lamb is delivered by caesarian surgery.

Therefore, this investigation may also need to focus on timing of pharmaceutical agents, dietary supplements, fresh food, any travel, pesticides such as mosquito repellents used on the person, and any new food or food sources in the diet during pregnancy. It may also become important to know the source of the fresh food or brand of food consumed. It may help in tracing to find what, if any, herbicides or pesticides were used or if any of the plant-sourced food was genetically modified. Amounts of food or supplements and timing may also be important.

While most people do not believe genetically modified foods to be a problem, it may be important to know if such foods were consumed and if they were treated with any chemicals (pesticides, herbicides, others), as it may alter the make-up of molecular parts of the plant and possibly be the cause or a contributing cause of these anomalies.

While this investigation should be detailed, it is extremely sad this situation has gone un-investigated since the early 2000s. This number of children with extremely similar deformities seems like it should have been investigated some time ago. Statistics are not always the most accurate at telling us what is happening in people's lives when we only look at numbers and arbitrary areas on a map. Hopefully they will find a cause and can help people avoid this horrible situation in the future. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
France: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6124711,100]

.................................................tg/tw/ml
</body>
