<header id=012773>
Published Date: 2022-10-01 22:16:58 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ebola update (21): Uganda
Archive Number: 20221002.8705908
</header>
<body id=012773>
EBOLA UPDATE (21): UGANDA
*************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Case update
[2] Ebola response
[3] Help needed

******
[1] Case update
Date: Fri 30 Sep 2022
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy) [edited]
https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2022/09/news-scan-sep-30-2022


Ebola Sudan infects 4 more in Uganda, 54 total
----------------------------------------------
Uganda's health ministry on Twitter today [30 Sep 2022] reported 4 more lab-confirmed Ebola Sudan cases, as well as 1 more death in a patient with a confirmed infection. The developments push the country's overall total to 54 cases, 35 of them confirmed and 19 listed as probable. The latest death brings Uganda's fatality count to 25, 7 in confirmed patients and 18 in people who had probable infections.

Officials said 427 contacts have been identified for follow up, and 16 people are currently being treated for their infections.

Jane Ruth Aceng Ocero, MBChB, MPH, Uganda's health minister, was on hand today [30 Sep 2022] to mark the discharge of 2 Ebola patients from Mubende Regional Referral Hospital. "Unfortunately one of the recovered patients lost his wife and child to #Ebola. May their souls rest in eternal peace," she said on Twitter.

Meanwhile, the World Health Organization (WHO) Uganda office today [30 Sep 2022] said construction continues on an Ebola treatment center in Madudu, where 14 cases have been confirmed, which it said will allow more timely treatment of patients.

The outbreak was first announced on [20 Sep 2022], marking Uganda's 1st outbreak involving the more rare and slightly less lethal Ebola Sudan strain. The hot spots are located in the west central part of the country, and officials fear further spread of the disease, given that it could have spread undetected for 3 weeks and that most of the activity is in communities on a busy highway that runs from Kampala, the country's capital, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) border. So far, no cases have been reported from Kampala.

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[A summary of Ebola and Marburg haemorrhagic fevers: outbreaks and case locations (Information about incidents and outbreaks of Ebola and Marburg, both viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHF)) from UK Health Security Agency can be found at https://www.gov.uk/guidance/ebola-and-marburg-haemorrhagic-fevers-outbreaks-and-case-locations.

The summary was published on 23 Mar 2014 and last updated 30 Sep 2022. - Mod.LK]

******
[2] Ebola response
Date: Sat 1 Oct 2022
Source: ABC news [abridged, edited]
https://abcnews.go.com/Health/wireStory/testing-trouble-adds-disorder-ugandas-ebola-response-90817278


Testing trouble adds to disorder in Uganda's Ebola response
-----------------------------------------------------------
The nurse wanted the toddler with a high fever transferred at once from a private clinic in Uganda to a public hospital even though the child tested positive for malaria amid an Ebola outbreak that has rattled health workers.

But the clinic's owner wasn't convinced as he examined the boy in his lap. The boy didn't have Ebola, he concluded after looking for the tell-tale bloody signs of the virus, and then sent the patient and his thankful mother home after administering intravenous medication.

The incident underscores the pitfalls health workers face in their response to a new Ebola outbreak in central Uganda. Because some malaria symptoms are similar to those of the Sudan strain of Ebola now circulating in 3 districts, community-based clinics that are usually the 1st port of call for those seeking care can be ill-equipped to make the right decisions at the right time.

"You can't say that everyone who is dying is dying of Ebola," said nurse Edgar Muhindo of Mubende's St. Florence Clinic, which unknowingly treated 2 Ebola patients for malaria before they sought care elsewhere. "But if it's Ebola, it's important to confirm that it's Ebola. That's why it's important for more health units to have the machines that can detect this Ebola virus."

Simple microscopes at such remote clinics can quickly confirm malaria or typhoid, possibly obscuring the possibility that the same patient could simultaneously have Ebola.

This was the case with a 24-year-old man who became sick in mid-September [2022], was treated for malaria and pneumonia, and died the day before a sample from him confirmed the Ebola outbreak.

By that time, 6 others had died from what officials called a strange illness.

Mellon Kyomugisha, a medical lab assistant who recalled touching the 1st confirmed Ebola victim when he came to St. Florence Clinic with malaria, said she felt it wasn't necessary to isolate until worrisome symptoms emerge. She was at work several days later, putting on protective gear when she had to see a patient.

Thirty-five Ebola cases have been confirmed since [20 Sep 2022], including 6 health workers, and a doctor is among at least 7 confirmed deaths. [See ProMED Ebola update (19): Uganda, Congo DR (NK) 20220929.8705855 and see update item [1] in this post].

Only one government-run facility, located 180 kilometers (111 miles) away in Entebbe, is equipped to test for Ebola, and officials sometimes wait up to 48 hours before results come in. ...

Health authorities are still investigating the source of the current outbreak, which likely began in August [2022], Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni said in a televised address earlier this week. It was a surprising admission for an East African country that's often cited for its leadership in fighting disease outbreaks.

Hamstrung by testing difficulties from the beginning, the initial response was sometimes chaotic as health officials raced to corral contacts and set up an isolation unit, according to health workers and others on the ground.

Some health workers said they felt helpless when ambulances delayed in picking up patients possibly suffering from Ebola. A woman whose farmworker died of Ebola recalled being taken into an isolation unit where some quarantined patients started to bleed, worrying those without symptoms who knew they risked infection.

Health authorities in Mubende have since created separate isolation spaces for Ebola patients and their contacts, said Rosemary Byabasaija, the leader of a government task force fighting Ebola. She said early "disorganization" in case management has since been rectified.

"When the news broke, it caused stampeding both in the hospital and the communities," she said.

Ugandan authorities had documented 427 known contacts by Friday [30 Sep 2022]. But some taken into quarantine escaped and remain at large, complicating the tracing work that's key to preventing a widening outbreak.

"It's like someone throwing a grenade," Dr. Emmanuel Batiibwe, director of Mubende Hospital, said of the outbreak's early days. "There's that explosion. Everybody scampers for cover and then they begin coming back slowly to see what's going on... So it was a similar scenario which happened here."

The hospital made "the biggest alarm you can ever think of," he said, and soon efforts were underway to set up an isolation unit with the help of Doctors Without Borders. That unit was still being set up 10 days after the outbreak had been declared.

Farmer Margaret Nakanyike, one of those herded into the isolation unit after 2 members of her household showed Ebola signs, said she was lucky to escape infection at the hospital. After testing negative, she is isolating at her house not far from the garden where her worker who died from Ebola was buried.

Across Madudu, the subcounty in Mubende that's been hardest hit, ambulances speed along the dirt road to respond to Ebola alerts.

Kaamu Kato, who runs a government-run health center in Madudu, waited anxiously for an ambulance to take a 16-year-old mother with a baby who had arrived with a fever and bloody diarrhea. She didn't have malaria, so Kato and others immediately Ebola-alerted for an ambulance.

The transport came 2 hours later. The patient, after trying to leave, lay in the grass, apparently in pain, as health workers watched from a distance. Kato said he could do nothing.

"There are things which are beyond my control," he said. "I have played my part. It's now up to them to come here quickly or to delay."

[Byline: Rodney Muhumuza]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[It is unfortunate that countries where Ebola outbreaks have occurred in the past, Uganda for one, are not able to maintain preparedness to treat suspect patients. But in the absence of public health preparedness, it is critical to get personal protective equipment to the health care workers. And good messaging to the population also is critical to educate them of the risk so they act knowledgeably. - Mod.LK]

******
[3] Help needed
Date: Fri 30 Sep 2022
Source: Fortune [edited]
https://fortune.com/2022/09/30/uganda-urgently-needs-help-stop-ebola-outbreak-health-pandemic-international-aceng-kerry-kyobe/


Uganda urgently needs help to stop the Ebola outbreak in its tracks
-------------------------------------------------------------------
In the same week President Biden declared the COVID-19 pandemic over, the threat of another infectious disease outbreak loomed large. On [20 Sep 2022], new cases of Ebola confirmed arising from a relatively rare strain of Ebolavirus were confirmed in Uganda.

As of [29 Sep 2022], there have been 35 confirmed cases and 7 confirmed deaths -- with many more probable cases and a suspected fatality rate of around 50%. The outbreak has now expanded to 2 other districts, with 427 contacts listed for follow-up, and it will potentially spread to congested parts of downtown Kampala, the capital city. Up to 6 health care workers - including one fatality -- were infected before the outbreak was identified [see updated case numbers in item 1 of this post].

Shockingly, Uganda is still isolated in the struggle to address this new threat despite the world having just endured the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic as a single global health security problem. There has been an increased focus on the need for pandemic preparedness, resilient health systems, and a well-protected workforce to respond successfully to threats. However, the global response is not to the level of the threat we know Ebola to be to Uganda and the rest of the world.

We urgently need more well-trained, well-equipped, and well-protected health workers who can safely help respond to stop this outbreak in its tracks. We need to urgently unlock funding and support from our partners for training, mentoring, reskilling, and potential vaccination of health workers -- buying us time against Ebola.

As with almost all global health investments and challenges over the past decades, recent investments have been myopically focused on a single disease -- in this case, COVID-19. We have spent several months (encouraged by global funding) strengthening our workforce against coronavirus -- but we now find ourselves at risk of being outrun by a pandemic we should be well equipped to tackle.

In the short term, we need urgent funding to train a skilled workforce able to detect and treat Ebola in Uganda. We are not currently getting the resources we need to help prevent the spread of this outbreak and ensure our health workers are protected and lives are saved.

In the longer term, we need the world to wake up and finally accept that we would all be better protected against diseases if countries had a fit-for-purpose health workforce able to address all diseases.

As trained medical doctors, we have seen first-hand the devastating impact of not having enough staff to provide the high-quality care we wanted to give our patients.

Since 2012, Seed Global Health has worked with governments across Africa to train physicians, nurses, and midwives to improve access to high-quality care. In Uganda, through partnerships with the government and in-country partners, we have contributed to the training of more than 4000 health workers across myriad specialties.

While COVID has been the most notorious pandemic of the past several years, in truth, we face numerous pandemics. In 2022, a country like Uganda faces not only threats of COVID, Ebola, or an upsurge in malaria in the north and eastern parts of the country, but we also still face the inequitable burdens of HIV, tuberculosis, trauma, and non-communicable disease.

Shockingly, an estimated 810 women continue to die each day due to complications related to pregnancy and childbirth. And none of this takes into account the devastating impacts of climate change, which are expected to cause additional deaths in the coming decade.

The multiple pandemics of today require a global and truly resilient pandemic strategy built on the strong foundation of greater investment in the health workforce -- one that is well-trained, well-distributed, and well-protected-to be able to meet the entire spectrum of diseases we face.

It is now irrefutable that investing in healthcare workers brings a positive return. In fact, it's more expensive not to invest. Investments in education and job creation in the health and social sectors result in improved health outcomes, global health security, and the advancement of women.

With 70% of our health workforce being women, this investment drives equity forward, challenges the gender gap that is so entrenched in many countries around the world, and allows women to participate more actively in the economy and public life.

We can contain this virus -- but we urge our partners in global health to help us to unlock the funding needed to protect the people of Uganda and our immediate neighbors for the long term.

We need the global community to respond to this latest outbreak. It's a challenge we must all face, with an approach grounded in facts and science, not in racism or colonial behaviors, which have been perpetuated for too long.

We can start by putting out the latest fire of Ebola. Then, let's build towards the pandemic preparedness we really need -- and the workforce that provides that.

[Byline: Jane Aceng, Vanessa Kerry and Henry Bossa Kyobe]

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[While one might think the COVID pandemic would have improved public health preparedness in general, it instead distracted from other diseases. Ebola is not a novel disease to Uganda, but the country seems to have been caught unprepared. It is crucial the world comes to its aid immediately with necessary funding, expertise, and equipment before the virus reaches dense population areas. Not having a vaccine or antivirals presents a challenge to stopping virus spread. But steps that can be taken to limit virus spread are listed below, as suggested by Mosoka Fallah, who was on the front lines in Liberia serving as the head of case detection for the National Ebola Response team and administering critical aspects of Liberia's Ebola response. (https://medicalxpress.com/news/2022-09-ebola-east-africa-frontline-expert.html)

"Five steps to stop Ebola spreading in East Africa: A frontline expert advises"
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
"1. Set up a robust cross-border surveillance system
"To prevent a further spread, a cross-border surveillance system must be created that can quickly identify, test and isolate cases for treatment. This system must have direct, simple communication lines with minimal bureaucracy. For instance, teams should use mobile applications like WhatsApp.

"One of the biggest weaknesses we faced during the 2014/2015 Ebola outbreak was that response workers in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea weren't able to communicate easily with colleagues in other countries. This resulted in the use of intermediaries, like the World Health Organization (WHO) office, which caused delays. We lost the critical element of speed -- every hour counts.

"Communities along the borders must be part of the surveillance system. Ebola response workers in West Africa created a network along the borders that helped them move with speed. Cross border preparedness meetings and direct communication on the progress of the evolving outbreak in Uganda will be crucial for containment strategies.

"2. Create an army of community contact tracers
"To curb the Ebola outbreak in East Africa a portion of the response funding must be used to create an army of case finders and contact tracers. They must know people within their community well and report cases that families may be trying to hide. Fears, ignorance and cultural beliefs and practices tend to make contacts reluctant to report themselves; or they escape from treatment centers.

"A crucial factor in containing the outbreak in Liberia was the payments of monthly stipends from the United Nations Development Fund and WHO to local pastors, imams, community leaders, teachers, university students and high school students. These ranged from US$80 to US$350 a month.

"This is key because it can turn communities from being hostile to becoming champions of the effort. It also helps to create trust.

"At the height of the Ebola outbreak in Liberia's Montserrado County -- where the capital is situated -- we had 5700 community leaders working with the response teams. They were able to visit 1.6 million households and identify thousands of sick people who were then either classified as suspect or probable cases by the more trained contact tracers.

"These volunteers defeated Ebola because communities trusted them. Flying in foreigners at great cost has been less effective because communities don't have the same level of trust in them.

"3. Recruit trusted messengers
"Misinformation, disinformation and rumors make response efforts difficult. It can create great hostility to response teams. The recruitment of messengers trusted by communities, and armed with the right message, is key.

"During the 2014/2015 oubreak, we targeted influential people within a community. They included a former fighter during the Liberian civil war -- people respected him because he was a part of a group that protected them from armed robbers.

"4. Rapid field testing should be used
"Fast testing and short turnaround times are crucial to isolating cases and preventing further spread.

"In the West Africa outbreak, our teams would ask a family to isolate a suspected case in a different room. They would then draw blood and send the sample to the field lab. Within 3 hours we had the results. If the person was positive we moved them to the isolation center. If negative, we asked them to self-isolate for 48 hours so we could test them again. This allowed the families to call us as soon as they suspected that one of them had fever.

"We also did oral swabs of all dead bodies in the communities. This helped us to pick up cases of silent super spreaders who had spread the virus but were misdiagnosed in the community.

"Both of these approaches helped us to restore the confidence of the community and gave us much speed.

"5. Increase surveillance of all vehicles
"Since this outbreak is occurring on a major road leading to Kampala and DRC, the surveillance of all vehicles is critical.

"In Liberia, we recruited and trained motorbike riders and transport vehicle riders. We gave them ledgers and notebooks and embedded them with our surveillance teams. They tracked all sick people and even took records of drivers who missed work. These were visited at home to see if they were sick.

"Tracing -- documenting the full address and host -- was done on all recent passengers. This helped us to tightly monitor the movements of people from the epicenter. (https://medicalxpress.com/news/2022-09-ebola-east-africa-frontline-expert.html) - Mod.LK

ProMED map:
Uganda: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8705908,97]
See Also
Ebola update (20): Uganda, Congo DR (NK) 20220930.8705877
Ebola update (19): Uganda, Congo DR (NK) 20220929.8705855
Ebola update (18): Uganda, Ebola Sudan strain, book review W. African outbreak 20220927.8705817
Ebola update (17): Uganda, Congo DR (NK,IT) 20220926.8705802
Ebola update (16): Uganda, more cases 20220924.8705775
Ebola update (15): Uganda, Ebola Sudan strain, WHO 20220923.8705768
Ebola update (14): Uganda 20220922.8705739
Ebola update (13): Uganda, Ebola Sudan strain, WHO 20220920.8705697
Ebola update (12): Congo DR (NK) vaccination, Uganda (KR) screening equipment 20220827.8705265
Ebola update (11): Congo DR (NK) conf 20220823.8705187
Ebola update (10): WHO, Congo DR (NK) susp 20220822.8705166
Ebola update (09): Congo DR (EQ), WHO, outbreak declared over 20220705.8704234
Ebola update (08): Congo DR (EQ) 20220531.8703594
Ebola update (07): Congo DR (EQ) WHO 20220527.8703498
Ebola update (06): Congo DR (EQ) fatal 20220523.8703421
Ebola update (05): Congo DR (EQ) 3rd case 20220507.8703098
Ebola update (04): Congo DR (EQ) 2nd case 20220427.8702885
Ebola update (03): Congo DR (EQ) 20220425.8702834
Ebola update (02): Congo DR (EQ) 20220424.8702804
2020
----
Ebola update (53): Congo DR (EQ) outbreak over, pathogenesis 20201118.7946079
Ebola update (25): Congo DR (EQ, NK) cases, response WHO, new spillover 20200606.7432964
Ebola update (23): Congo DR (EQ) outbreak 20200601.7416123
and other items in the archives
.................................................sb/lk/may/ml
</body>
