<header id=026842>
Published Date: 2016-06-03 10:34:02 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Lyme disease - Canada: (NS) canine
Archive Number: 20160603.4262503
</header>
<body id=026842>
LYME DISEASE - CANADA: (NOVA SCOTIA) CANINE
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 1 Jun 2016
Source: The Chronicle Herald [edited]
http://thechronicleherald.ca/novascotia/1368925-two-dogs-diagnosed-with-lyme-disease-at-fall-river-veterinary-hospital


Two confirmed canine cases of Lyme disease have been diagnosed in 2 weeks at Fall River Veterinary Hospital [Nova Scotia], pointing to an uptick in the illness among pets.

The tick _Ixodes scapularis_ is commonly known as the deer tick or blacklegged tick and can transmit Lyme disease to dogs or humans, but has to latch on and feed for up to 48 hours in order to do so. The bacterium transmitted by the tick is _Borrelia burgdorferi_.

"We're seeing an increase in tick numbers every year," said Dr Ainsley Davidson-Rowe, who confirmed the most recent case Tuesday morning [31 May 2016].

"We're seeing them in more and more areas in the Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM) -- they're definitely spreading. There are no areas in HRM I would call tick-free, so everyone has to be on the lookout," she said.

"We're going to be seeing increases in diagnoses in people and pets."

The signs of Lyme disease can be very vague -- you might just think it's stiffness (in your dog), or old age, but in reality that dog could be Lyme positive, she said.

"The most important message is that, for dogs, we have a really effective and safe tick prevention. We can put them on medication that keeps ticks off them. If we can keep ticks off, we cut the odds of a dog bringing ticks into the house," she said, citing the use of Bravecto. Nexgard is another such product.

Lyme disease is spread through the long-term latch-on from a black-legged tick. Ticks are typically found in wooded areas and in tall grass areas. They can also be found in yards.

Cats are very resistant to Lyme disease, but can still get ticks on them, she said.

"We also have a vaccine for Lyme disease, but tick prevention is the most important aspect, as a tick that doesn't attach/feed can't pass on Lyme," she said.

Cases of the Lyme disease the blood-sucker carries are on the rise among Nova Scotians, with colonies firmly entrenched in 6 areas around the province and their populations rising everywhere, according to the latest stats available from Health & Wellness.

From 2002 to 2014, there were a total of 443 cases of Lyme disease reported in Nova Scotia. In 2014 alone, there were 114 cases reported, according to Health & Wellness numbers.

Elaine Holmes, director of communicable disease prevention and control for the Nova Scotia Department of Health & Wellness, recommended preventative measures for families at work or play.

"If folks are out and about in wooded areas, tall grass, or shrubbed areas, they need to wear enclosed shoes, cover their skin as much as possible," she said.

Holmes recommends the use of an insect repellant that contains DEET, but to pay strict attention to directions, particularly in respect to children.

It's important to check yourself, children, and pets on return from spending time outdoors.

While various Internet sources recommend everything from fingernail polish to unscrewing a tick to remove it once it's embedded, Holmes said the best way is to remove it directly and carefully.

"Use tweezers, as close to possible to where the tick is embedded in the skin, and gently pull it straight out," she said, adding it's important not to jerk, squeeze, or twist the tick while you're pulling it out. Put the removed tick inside a ziplock-style bag and put it in the garbage.

Once it's removed, wash the area with hot soapy water or hydrogen peroxide. If part of the tick breaks off under the skin, seek the help of your health care provider in pulling it out, Holmes said.

"In Nova Scotia, we really would like our citizens to enjoy our outdoors and enjoy them safely," she said.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Lyme disease is caused by 4 main species of bacteria: _Borrelia burgdorferi_, _B. mayonii_, _B. afzelii_, and _B. garinii_. _B. burgdorferi_ and _B. mayonii_ cause Lyme disease in the United States, while _B. afzelii_, and _B. garinii_ are the leading causes of Lyme disease in Europe and Asia. The most common tickborne illness in these regions, Lyme disease is transmitted by the bite of an infected black-legged tick, commonly known as a deer tick.

Lyme disease in pets
--------------------
Lyme disease is transmitted to dogs through the bite of a tick. Once in the blood stream, the Lyme disease organism is carried to many parts of the body and is likely to localize in joints. It was first thought that only a few types of ticks could transmit this disease, but now it appears that several common species may be involved. The most common type of tick to carry Lyme disease is the deer tick or black-legged tick.

If pets are diagnosed with Lyme disease, they cannot transmit it to people, but the tick must bite the person.

Symptoms of Lyme disease are more difficult to detect in animals than in people. The characteristic rash does not develop in dogs or cats. Because the other symptoms of the disease may be delayed or go unrecognized and because the symptoms are similar to those of many other diseases, Lyme disease in animals is often not considered until other diseases have been eliminated.

Many dogs affected with Lyme disease are taken to a veterinarian because they seem to be experiencing generalized pain and have stopped eating. Affected dogs have been described as if they were "walking on eggshells." Often these pets have high fevers. Dogs may also begin limping. This painful lameness often appears suddenly and may shift from one leg to another. If untreated, it may eventually disappear, only to recur weeks or months later.

Some pets are infected with the Lyme disease organism for over a year before they finally show signs. By this time, the disease may be widespread throughout the body.

Dogs with lameness, swollen joints, and fever are suspected of having Lyme disease. However, other diseases may also cause these symptoms. There are 2 blood tests that may be used for confirmation. The 1st is an antibody test. This test does not detect the actual spirochete in the blood but does detect the presence of antibodies created by exposure to the organism. A test can be falsely negative if the dog is infected but has not yet formed antibodies, or if it never forms enough antibodies to cause a positive reaction. This may occur in animals with suppressed immune systems. Some dogs that have been infected for long periods of time may no longer have enough antibodies present to be detected by the test. Therefore, a positive test is meaningful, but a negative is not.

The 2nd test is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, a DNA test that is very specific and sensitive. However, not all dogs have the spirochete in their blood cells. If a blood sample is tested, a false negative may occur. The best sample for PCR testing is the fluid from an affected joint.

Because the Lyme spirochete is a bacterium, it can be controlled by antibiotics. However, a lengthy course of treatment is necessary to completely eradicate the organism. The initial antibiotic selected to treat an infected pet may not be effective against the disease, especially if the infection is long-standing. In this situation, changing to another antibiotic is often effective. Occasionally, the initial infection will recur, or the pet will become re-infected by being bitten by another infected tick.

The key to prevention is keeping your dog from being exposed to ticks. Ticks are found in grassy, wooded, and sandy areas. They find their way onto an animal by climbing to the top of a leaf, blade of grass, or short trees, especially cedar trees. Here they wait until their sensors detect an approaching animal on which to crawl or drop. Keeping animals from thick underbrush reduces their exposure to ticks. Dogs should be kept on trails when walked near wooded or tall grass areas. Vaccination against Lyme disease is recommended for pets that live in endemic areas or that travel to areas where Lyme disease is prevalent.

Check your pet immediately after it has been in a tick-infected area. The deer tick is a small tick and only about pinhead size in juvenile stage, but a little more obvious in adult phase and after feeding. If you find a tick moving on your pet, the tick has not fed. Remove the tick promptly and place it in rubbing alcohol or crush it between two solid surfaces. If you find a tick attached to your pet, grasp the tick with fine tweezers or your finger nails near the dog's skin and firmly pull it straight out. Make sure you protect your fingers from exposure by using a tissue or a disposable glove. You may need another person to help restrain your dog. Removing the tick quickly is important since the disease does not appear to be transmitted until the tick has fed for approximately 12 hours. If you crush the tick, do not get the tick's contents, including blood, on your skin. The spirochete that causes Lyme disease can pass through a wound or cut in your skin.

A safe and effective vaccine is available for protecting dogs against Lyme disease. This vaccine is initially given twice, at 2- to 3-week intervals. Annual revaccination is necessary to maintain immunity. Vaccination against Lyme disease will be determined by your pet's lifestyle and individual risk assessment. Be sure to discuss any questions you may have regarding the type and frequency of vaccination with your veterinarian.

There are also topical products and oral products to prevent fleas and ticks. Some products include Bravecto, NexGuard, and Advantix.

The best prevention may be a combination of vaccination, topical, or oral products and frequent and thorough examinations of your pet for ticks.

Lyme disease in people
----------------------
The signs and symptoms of Lyme disease vary and usually appear in stages.

A small, red bump often appears at the site of a tick bite or tick removal and resolves over a few days. This is normal after a tick bite and does not indicate Lyme disease. However, these signs and symptoms may occur within a month after you've been infected:

Early signs and symptoms
------------------------
- Rash. From 3 to 30 days after an infected tick bite, an expanding red area might appear that sometimes clears in the center, forming a bull's-eye pattern. The rash (erythema migrans) expands slowly over days and can spread to 12 inches (30 centimeters) across. It is typically not itchy or painful.
Erythema migrans is one of the hallmarks of Lyme disease. Some people develop this rash at more than one place on their bodies.
- Flu-like symptoms. Fever, chills, fatigue, body aches, and a headache may accompany the rash.

Later signs and symptoms
------------------------
If untreated, new signs and symptoms of Lyme infection might appear in the following weeks to months. These include:
- Erythema migrans appearing in other areas of your body.
- Joint pain. Bouts of severe joint pain and swelling are especially likely to affect your knees, but the pain can shift from one joint to another.
- Neurological problems. Weeks, months, or even years after infection, you might develop inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain (meningitis), temporary paralysis of one side of your face (Bell's palsy), numbness or weakness in your limbs, and impaired muscle movement.

Signs and symptoms caused by the bacterium _B. mayonii_ may also include nausea and vomiting, and diffuse rashes (rather than a single bull's-eye rash commonly associated with Lyme disease)

Several weeks after infection, some people develop:
- Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat. Heart problems rarely last more than a few days or weeks.
- Eye inflammation.
- Liver inflammation (hepatitis).
- Severe fatigue.

Only a minority of blacklegged tick bites leads to Lyme disease. The longer the tick remains attached to your skin, the greater your risk of getting the disease. Lyme infection is unlikely if the tick is attached for less than 36 to 48 hours.

If you think you've been bitten and have signs and symptoms of Lyme disease -- particularly if you live in an area where Lyme disease is prevalent -- contact your doctor. Treatment for Lyme disease is more effective if begun early.

See your doctor even if symptoms disappear. It's important to consult your doctor even if signs and symptoms disappear -- the absence of symptoms doesn't mean the disease is gone. Left untreated, Lyme disease can spread to other parts of your body from several months to years after infection, causing arthritis and nervous system problems. Ticks also can transmit other illnesses, such as babesiosis and Colorado tick fever.

Left untreated, Lyme disease can cause:
- Chronic joint inflammation (Lyme arthritis), particularly of the knee.
- Neurological symptoms, such as facial palsy and neuropathy.
- Cognitive defects, such as impaired memory.
- Heart rhythm irregularities

The variable signs and symptoms of Lyme disease are nonspecific and often are found in other conditions, so diagnosis can be difficult. What's more, the ticks that transmit Lyme disease also can spread other diseases at the same time.

If you don't have the characteristic Lyme disease rash, your doctor might ask about your medical history, including whether you've been outdoors in the summer where Lyme disease is common, and do a physical exam.

Diagnosis
---------
Lab tests to identify antibodies to the bacteria can help confirm the diagnosis. These tests are most reliable a few weeks after an infection, after your body has had time to develop antibodies. They include:
- Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test. The test used most often to detect Lyme disease, ELISA detects antibodies to _B. burgdorferi_. But because it can sometimes provide false-positive results, it's not used as the sole basis for diagnosis. This test might not be positive during the early stage of Lyme disease, but the rash is distinctive enough to make the diagnosis without further testing in people who live in areas infested with ticks that transmit Lyme disease.
- Western blot test. If the ELISA test is positive, this test is usually done to confirm the diagnosis. In this 2-step approach, the Western blot detects antibodies to several proteins of _B. burgdorferi_.

Treatment and drugs
-------------------
Antibiotics are used to treat Lyme disease. In general, recovery will be quicker and more complete the sooner treatment begins.

Antibiotics
- Oral antibiotics. These are the standard treatment for early-stage Lyme disease. These usually include doxycycline for adults and children older than 8, or amoxicillin or cefuroxime for adults, younger children, and pregnant or breast-feeding women. A 14- to 21-day course of antibiotics is usually recommended, but some studies suggest that courses lasting 10 to 14 days are equally effective.
- Intravenous antibiotics. If the disease involves the central nervous system, your doctor might recommend treatment with an intravenous antibiotic for 14 to 28 days. This is effective in eliminating infection, although it may take you some time to recover from your symptoms. Intravenous antibiotics can cause various side effects, including a lower white blood cell count, mild to severe diarrhea, or colonization or infection with other antibiotic-resistant organisms unrelated to Lyme.
- After treatment, a small number of people still have some symptoms, such as muscle aches and fatigue. The cause of these continuing symptoms, known as post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome, is unknown, and treating with more antibiotics doesn't help. Some experts believe that certain people who get Lyme disease are predisposed to develop an autoimmune response that contributes to their symptoms. More research is needed.

Bismacine
The Food and Drug Administration warns against the use of bismacine, an injectable compound prescribed by some alternative medicine practitioners to treat Lyme disease. Bismacine, also known as chromacine, contains high levels of the metal bismuth. Although bismuth is safely used in some oral medications for stomach ulcers, it's not approved for use in injectable form or as a treatment for Lyme disease. Bismacine can cause bismuth poisoning, which may lead to heart and kidney failure.

Prevention
----------
The best way to prevent Lyme disease is to avoid areas where deer ticks live, especially wooded, bushy areas with long grass. You can decrease your risk of getting Lyme disease with some simple precautions:
- Cover up. When in wooded or grassy areas, wear shoes, long pants tucked into your socks, a long-sleeved shirt, a hat, and gloves. Try to stick to trails and avoid walking through low bushes and long grass. Keep your dog on a leash.
- Use insect repellents. Apply insect repellent with a 20 percent or higher concentration of DEET to your skin. Parents should apply repellant to their children, avoiding their hands, eyes, and mouth. Keep in mind that chemical repellents can be toxic, so follow directions carefully. Apply products with permethrin to clothing or buy pretreated clothing.
- Do your best to tick-proof your yard. Clear brush and leaves where ticks live. Keep woodpiles in sunny areas.
- Check yourself, your children, and your pets for ticks. Be especially vigilant after spending time in wooded or grassy areas. Deer ticks are often no bigger than the head of a pin, so you may not discover them unless you search carefully.
It's helpful to shower as soon as you come indoors. Ticks often remain on your skin for hours before attaching themselves. Showering and using a washcloth might remove unattached ticks.

- Don't assume you're immune. You can get Lyme disease more than once.
- Remove a tick as soon as possible with tweezers. Gently grasp the tick near its head or mouth. Don't squeeze or crush the tick, but pull carefully and steadily. Once you've removed the entire tick, dispose of it and apply antiseptic to the bite area.

Portions of this comment were extracted from: http://www.vcahospitals.com/main/pet-health-information/article/animal-health/lyme-disease-in-dogs/837 and http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/lyme-disease/basics/definition/con-20019701. - Mod.TG

Maps of Canada can be seen at https://canadaalive.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/canada_political_map.gif and https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4262503,53542 - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
Lyme disease - USA (02): (upper Midwest region) new Borrelia species 20160222.4040006
Lyme disease - USA: (OH) increased incidence 20160106.3915628
2015
----
Lyme disease - Canada: (MB) increased incidence 20150926.3673159
Lyme disease - USA (02): (PA) increased incidence 20150616.3443029
Lyme disease - USA: (CA) avian hosts 20150228.3199432
2014
----
Lyme disease - USA (07): (ME) update 20141211.3028449
Tick-borne diseases - USA: (MA) Lyme dis., miyamotoi, anaplasmosis, babesiosis 20140826.2723555
Lyme disease - USA (06): (NY) vaccination, comment 20140730.2646821
Lyme disease - USA (05): (NY) increased incidence, background 20140730.2645353
Lyme disease - USA (04): (NY) increased incidence 20140728.2640626
Lyme disease - Canada (04): (QC) increased incidence 20140714.2608176
Lyme disease - USA (03): (NY) B. burgdorferi, B. microti coinfection in ticks 20140625.2563150
Lyme disease - Canada (03): (NS) increased incidence 20140513.2468667
Lyme disease - Canada (02): (ON) B. burgdorferi prevalence in ticks 20140509.2461398
Lyme disease - Canada: (NS) arthritis, children 20140405.2383959
Lyme disease - USA (02): (WI) increased incidence 20140319.2341237
Lyme disease - USA: (NY) cervid, human, control 20140214.2277111
.................................................sb/tg/mj/mpp
</body>
