<header id=033717>
Published Date: 2022-02-01 21:37:52 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (QL) dog, ticks
Archive Number: 20220202.8701211
</header>
<body id=033717>
EHRLICHIOSIS - AUSTRALIA: (QL) DOG, TICKS
*****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 31 Jan 2022
Source: Queensland Country Life [edited]
https://www.queenslandcountrylife.com.au/story/7600878/home-grown-case-of-killer-dog-disease-found-in-queensland/?cs=4785


There has been a home-grown case of the deadly dog disease ehrlichiosis in Queensland. Northwest Queensland has been added to the growing list of areas where the disease is spreading. Animal experts say it is only a matter of time before every dog in Australia is at risk from the disease.

Ehrlichiosis, which was only discovered in the Kimberley in May 2020, has now spread to most Australian states, bar Tasmania, where border checks are trying to keep the disease at bay. The disease is spread by the brown dog tick, which is prevalent across northern Australia but has been found across the mainland.

Queensland has had previous cases of ehrlichiosis but only from dogs transported across from the Northern Territory. Thousands of dogs have died in the Territory since the 1st cases were discovered there in June 2020. The latest case has been confirmed at Mount Isa.

Areas where ehrlichiosis is "known to be active" now include the entire NT, the Kimberley and Pilbara regions of Western Australia, northern South Australia, and now, northwest Queensland. Movements of dogs from these areas must be managed.

Biosecurity Queensland says this latest case was confirmed several weeks ago in a dog, from Mount Isa, that had not travelled outside Queensland, meaning the disease had infected the local tick population.

A spokeswoman for the Agriculture and Fisheries Department said the case was confirmed by the government's Biosecurity Sciences Laboratory on 25 Jan [2022].

The dog was taken to a Mount Isa vet on 19 Jan [2022], where it had clinical signs consistent with ehrlichiosis including the presence of ticks. The dog's condition improved after being treated by the veterinarian, the spokeswoman said.

"Biosecurity Queensland is investigating the dog's movements to determine where the dog became infected and is working with the relevant groups to minimise the risk of further infections.

"Although they can vary considerably among dogs, signs typically include fever, lethargy, enlarged lymph nodes, loss of appetite, discharge from the eyes and nose, weight loss, and anaemia and bleeding disorders." [Dogs can die from this disease as well. - Mod.TG]

Everyone involved with dogs has a general biosecurity obligation (GBO) under the Biosecurity Act 2014 to take all reasonable steps to ensure they do not spread a pest, disease, or contaminant, including _Ehrlichia canis_, [the bacterium that acts as the causative agent of ehrlichiosis].

Ehrlichiosis is a nationally notifiable disease, and anyone who suspects a dog is showing signs of the disease must report it immediately to the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888.

The disease had also been found in Victoria and NSW but from dogs that had travelled to the high-risk areas.

There are concerted campaigns underway across northern Australia about tick treatment for dogs to try and halt this disease. The removal of COVID-19 roadblocks to prevent travel during the pandemic had also slowed the spread of the disease.

"Ehrlichiosis can make dogs very sick and, without treatment, can kill them," Biosecurity Queensland said in a Facebook post. "Dogs sick with this disease get a fever, look very tired, do not want to eat and lose weight. Their eyes can also go blue and mucky, and they can get nosebleeds.

"It is important you use anti-tick products on your dogs [only products that are approved for use on dogs - Mod.TG] to stop the ticks from biting them and spreading the disease. If your dog is sick, make sure you take it to a vet."

The wet season is known to be the worst time for the spread of ticks.

The best protection is an external tick control product to kills brown dog ticks on contact, before the tick can attach to your dog.

Owners are also advised to regularly inspect their dog for ticks, paying particular attention to the head and neck, inside their ears, on their chest, between their toes, and around their mouth and gums. [Ticks also like to hide in the "armpit" area, between the front leg and the body wall, and around the anus. - Mod.TG]

Biosecurity officials have still not been able to explain how ehrlichiosis arrived in Australia despite concerted efforts over many years to keep it out. Ehrlichiosis is 2nd only to rabies as the canine killer the country was trying to stop arriving.

[Byline: Chris McLennan]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

["Human health
---------------
"Infected dogs do not transmit ehrlichiosis to people; however, in rare cases, infected ticks may infect people. The Australian Government Department of Health has information on their website [https://www1.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/ohp-tick-bite-prevention.htm] about ticks and human health precautions.

"Advice for dog owners
----------------------------
"You can do a number of things to help prevent this disease in your dogs:

"- Have your dog on a tick control program if living in or travelling to areas where the brown dog tick is present such as northern Australia.
- Use repellent tick collars and spot-ons as the best primary protection, in combination with tablets and chews registered for tick control.
- Where possible, avoid taking your dogs into tick-infested areas.
- Inspect your dog daily for ticks, especially if they have been in a tick-infested area. Run your fingers through your dog's coat over their skin and feel for abnormal bumps. Pay particular attention to the head and neck, inside their ears, on their chest, between their toes, and around their mouths and gums.
- If you are travelling with your dogs to Australia's northern regions, be particularly vigilant about tick-infested environments and congregations of dogs which may be carrying ticks. This includes places where you may stop at, like fuel stations and caravan parks.
- Contact your nearest vet if your dog is showing any of signs of the disease which include fever, lethargy, enlarged lymph nodes, loss of appetite, discharge from the eyes and nose, weight loss, anaemia, and bleeding disorders such as nosebleeds or bleeding under the skin that looks like small spots, patches, or bruising.

"Ehrlichiosis requires veterinary treatment and supportive care, and it can also resemble other conditions with similar signs, including tick-borne diseases such as anaplasmosis and babesiosis, which are already present.

"You should contact your private vet if you have a dog that is unwell, because early treatment provides the best chance for them to recover.

"Reporting signs of the disease
---------------------------------
"Ehrlichiosis is a nationally notifiable disease. This means, if you suspect your dog is showing signs of the disease, you should seek veterinary advice. ou or your vet can report the disease by calling the national Emergency Animal Disease Watch hotline on 1800 675 888.

"About ehrlichiosis
---------------------
"The disease ehrlichiosis is caused by a tick-borne bacteria called _Ehrlichia canis_.

"The disease has 3 phases: an 'acute' phase or early signs of disease, a 'subclinical phase' where there are no outward signs of disease, and a 'chronic' or long-term stage of disease. Visible signs in the chronic form of the disease are similar to those in the acute phase but are more severe.

"Ehrlichiosis occurs worldwide, particularly in tropical and sub-tropical regions.

"Once the disease is in the brown dog tick population, it's very difficult to control, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions.

"Government response to ehrlichiosis
-------------------------------------------
"The national Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases met in response to this disease incursion, and in November 2020, the committee considered the surveillance data. It agreed that it was not technically feasible to eradicate the disease because it is established in the NT and north WA.

"The state and federal governments will continue to work on ehrlichiosis through the Animal Health Committee, which comprises the chief veterinary officers from each jurisdiction. The committee is currently investigating whether it is possible and practical to implement nationally consistent control strategies for the disease.

"Most jurisdictions are running awareness campaigns to inform the community and travellers about ehrlichiosis and the actions they can take to prevent the disease in their dogs."
(https://www.outbreak.gov.au/current-responses-to-outbreaks/ehrlichiosis-dogs) [Photographs of some of the dogs are included. - Mod.TG]

This is quite troubling. Yes, the disease is carried by ticks, but I do not understand why appropriate ectoparasite control is not more available to the canine pet owners. For example, afoxolaner is a commonly available ectoparasite treatment for ticks and fleas, and it's available in an easy-to-deliver chewable form in the US and other countries.

"Afoxolaner is used to treat and control flea and tick infestations in dogs."

"Sometimes afoxolaner is used for the treatment of sarcoptic mange or demodectic mange."

"The tablet should always be given as directed by your veterinarian."
(https://vcahospitals.com/know-your-pet/afoxolaner)

According to the manufacturer the product is approved for use and available in Australia (https://www.boehringer-ingelheim.com/press-release/two-new-claims-nexgard-range-eu-and-australia).

It has proven very effective in other countries, yet it appears veterinarians are not recommending it, or people are not providing preventative measures for their pets. If the authorities are concerned about this disease, why is there not a campaign to make all pet owners aware of the problems, and how to combat it? Where is the educational outreach? There are many avenues to make this a successful campaign, whether by mailers, email, social media platforms, and news outlets. The word about tick (and flea) control is essential for animal and human health.

Ivermectin is another product with a track record against ticks and fleas. There are numerous companies with this product and a track record.

"Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME) develops after a dog has become infected with _Ehrlichia canis_ bacteria, which are primarily transmitted to dogs through the bites of brown dog ticks (_Rhipicephalus sanguineus_). Brown dog ticks can be found throughout the United States [and Australia] (and worldwide), but are especially problematic in warmer climates, which means that ehrlichiosis is also most frequently diagnosed in these areas.

"Dogs will [usually] appear perfectly normal for 1-3 weeks after being bitten by a tick carrying _E. canis_ bacteria. If the dog is unable to fight off the infection during this time, [the pet] will enter what is known as the acute phase of infection. During this time, the bacteria are actively reproducing within a certain type of white blood cell and are spreading throughout the body. Dogs can display a variety of symptoms during the acute phase of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, including fever, lethargy, poor appetite, lymph node enlargement, abnormal bruising and bleeding, chronic eye inflammation, neurologic abnormalities, and occasionally lameness.

"These [signs] will typically last for 2-4 weeks [occasionally longer - Mod.TG] if left untreated. Many dogs then appear to get better on their own and enter a subclinical phase of the disease, which can last for months to years. During the subclinical phase, blood work may reveal a low platelet count (thrombocytopenia), but otherwise, dogs typically appear to be perfectly normal. Some dogs never progress out of the subclinical phase of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, but others eventually enter the chronic phase of the disease. Signs are similar to those described above for the acute phase, but the longer they go on, the harder they become to treat. [Even dogs in subclinical phases appear to have less energy and frequently require longer or more frequent rest periods. - Mod.TG]

"Another type of ehrlichiosis, called canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis (CGE), is caused by infection with _E. ewingii_ bacteria, which are typically transmitted through the bites of lone star ticks (_Amblyomma americanum_). Lone star ticks are primarily found in the Eastern, Southeastern, and Midwestern parts of the United States.

"The typical signs of CGE are a little different than those that are seen with CME and include fever, lethargy, lameness (common and often appears as stiffness when walking), vomiting, diarrhea, and neurologic abnormalities.

"Whichever form of ehrlichiosis a dog has, it is important your pet be evaluated by a veterinarian as quickly as possible. Diagnosing ehrlichiosis can be somewhat complicated. Many of the signs of ehrlichiosis are indistinguishable from those seen with other diseases like Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme disease, lymphosarcoma, and certain immune disorders. As part of the diagnostic process, most veterinarians will collect a complete health history, perform a thorough physical exam, and then run a complete blood count (CBC), blood chemistry panel, urinalysis, fecal examination, and specific lab work aimed at diagnosing ehrlichiosis.

"Keep in mind the tests commonly used to screen for ehrlichiosis only indicate whether a dog has been exposed to _Ehrlichia_ bacteria, and some dogs are exposed but don't go on to become sick. Therefore, to be definitively diagnosed with ehrlichiosis, a dog should test positive for exposure, have some of the common signs of the disease, and respond to appropriate treatment. Other types of _Ehrlichia_ tests are available to confirm a diagnosis of ehrlichiosis and can be used in complicated cases. [Don't wait to find out how your pet responds. Have the vet send blood to a veterinary diagnostic lab with specific tests available for a diagnosis. - Mod.TG]

"Veterinarians most commonly prescribe the antibiotic doxycycline to treat ehrlichiosis in dogs. It is typically given once a day for 3-4 weeks [or may be given twice daily depending on all conditions of the pet. - Mod.TG]. Other medications can also be used when the situation warrants.

"If a dog receives treatment in a timely manner, the condition will usually begin to improve rapidly, oftentimes within just a few days, and the prognosis for complete recovery is good. In more severe cases, additional treatments (such as intravenous fluids, blood transfusions, immunosuppressive medications, and/or pain relievers) may also be necessary.

"Ehrlichiosis is a very serious disease, and dogs having been infected once can develop it again. No vaccine is currently available to protect dogs against ehrlichiosis, although research is being done into developing one. As of now, the best way to prevent dogs from developing ehrlichiosis is to protect them from tick bites. Your veterinarian can recommend the best form of tick prevention based on your dog's health, lifestyle, and the prevalence of ticks and ehrlichiosis in your area."
(https://www.petmd.com/dog/parasites/signs-and-symptoms-ehrlichiosis-dogs)

- Mod.TG

ProMED map of Queensland, Australia: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8701211,285]
See Also
2021
----
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (03): (NT) ticks, dog 20210717.8526399
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (02): (VI) dog 20210625.8473477
Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (SA) dog 20210416.8310611
2020
----
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (05): (WA) dog 20201230.8056516
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (04): (NT) dog 20201222.8039768
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (03): (WA) imported dog, testing 20200711.7564789
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (02): (WA) dog, OIE 20200605.7431561
Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (WA) dog 20200603.7424600
.................................................sb/tg/tw/ml
</body>
