<header id=017944>
Published Date: 2013-09-07 19:49:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (68): animal reservoir, camel, research
Archive Number: 20130907.1929762
</header>
<body id=017944>
MERS-COV - EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN (68): ANIMAL RESERVOIR, CAMEL, RESEARCH
************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 5 Sep 2013
Source: University of Minnesota Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) [summ., edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2013/09/study-reveals-more-signs-mers-cov-camels


Study reveals more signs of MERS-CoV in camels
----------------------------------------------
More than 90 percent of camels in Egypt tested positive for MERS-CoV antibodies.

Scientists have found more evidence that many camels in the Middle East have been exposed to the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) or a close relative, increasing the suspicion that camels may have spread the virus to humans.

In serologic tests on 110 dromedary camels in Egypt, one test showed that 94 percent of them had antibodies to MERS-CoV, and a 2nd test revealed antibodies in 98 percent, according to a report in today's [5 Sep 2013] issue of Eurosurveillance [see item 2]. Tests of humans, water buffaloes, cows, and other domestic animals in Egypt and Hong Kong showed no MERS-CoV antibodies.

"The antibody titres were very high" in both sets of tests, "suggesting that the virus infecting these camels was MERS-CoV virus itself or a very closely related virus," says the report by a team of Chinese, Egyptian, and American scientists.

The findings echo those published last month [August 2013] by a team from the Netherlands and Germany, who tested 50 dromedaries in Oman and found that all had antibodies to MERS-CoV or a close relative. They also found that 14 percent of a sample of camels in the Canary Islands had similar antibodies.

Which animals harbor the MERS virus and which ones passed, or are passing, it to humans remains a mystery. Although the antibody findings indicate that camels probably have been exposed to MERS-CoV or a very similar virus, scientists have not yet isolated the virus itself from camels or any other animals.

Two weeks ago another group reported finding a fragment of DNA in an Egyptian tomb bat that matched MERS-CoV, but the fragment was so small that experts said it could have represented a related virus, not the identical species.

For the new study, the investigators devised a new serologic test that they say is safe and specific and therefore useful for large-scale seroepidemiologic studies in animals. The test, called a pseudoparticle neutralization (ppNT) assay, involves a nonreplicating HIV virus that has been engineered to produce the spike protein of MERS-CoV.

The team also used what they call the gold-standard test, microneutralization (MN), but they note that it requires the use of live MERS-CoV virus and therefore Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) containment. In contrast, the pseudoparticle test involves no dangerous live virus and can be used in less stringent BSL-2 labs.

The authors collected animal and human serum samples in Egypt and Hong Kong, with the Hong Kong sera serving as unexposed controls. In Egypt, they gathered samples from 110 dromedaries, 8 water buffaloes, 25 cows, 5 sheep, and 13 goats.

Most of the camels had been imported from Sudan and were 5 to 7 years old. The group also used 815 human samples that had been collected for a study on influenza virus.

In Hong Kong, the authors used samples from 260 swine and 204 bird samples, including wild northern pintails and Eurasian widgeons, plus 528 archived human samples collected in 2011 and 2012.

In screening tests, both MN and the ppNT test showed a high prevalence of MERS-CoV antibodies (a titer of at least 1:20) in the camels: 93.6 percent and 98.2 percent respectively, the report says. The antibody titers ranged up to 1280 or higher in the MN test and up to 10 240 in the ppNT assay. None of the other animal samples or the human samples showed any signs of antibodies to MERS-CoV.

Of 5 camel samples that were negative on the MN test, 4 had weakly positive results on the ppNT, with antibody titers ranging from 40 to 160.

Given that several other coronaviruses are extremely common in humans, the lack of MERS-CoV antibodies in the human samples indicates that the MN and ppNT assays are specific for MERS-CoV, the investigators write.

The team also found that the camel sera with high MERS-CoV antibody levels did not cross-react with the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) coronavirus.

"Taken together, these data indicate that a MERS-CoV or a highly related virus is endemic in dromedary camels imported for slaughter in Egypt," they state. "These findings provide independent confirmation of the results recently reported by Reusken et al [the Dutch-German team], who found very high antibody titres to MERS-CoV in dromedary camels."

Because the camels used in the study had been brought to Egypt from Sudan and other African countries, it is unclear where they originally acquired their infection, the report says. Given the similar findings from camels in Oman and the Canary Islands, "it is likely that this coronavirus is widespread in North and East Africa and the Arabian Peninsula."

If future research confirms that bats and dromedary camels harbor MERS-CoV, "we will have a scenario of a virus reservoir in bats with a peridomestic animal such as the camel as intermediate host, which may in fact be the immediate source of human infection," the investigators say.

They add that in some MERS-CoV index cases, the patients had a history of exposure to camels. "Given that the MERS-like coronavirus in camels appears to be ubiquitous, it remains to be explained why MERS in humans appears relatively rare," they observe.

Reference:
Perera RA, Wang P, Gomaa MR, et al. Seroepidemiology for MERS coronavirus using microneutralisation and pseudoparticle virus neutralization assays reveal a high prevalence of antibody in dromedary camels in Egypt, June 2013. Eurosurveill 2013 Sep 5;18(36)

[Byline: Robert Roos]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2]
Date: Thu 5 Sep 2013
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 18, Issue 36, 05 September 2013 [summ., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20574


Seroepidemiology for MERS coronavirus using microneutralisation and pseudoparticle virus neutralization assays reveal a high prevalence of antibody in dromedary camels in Egypt, June 2013
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract
--------
We describe a novel spike pseudoparticle neutralisation assay (ppNT) for seroepidemiological studies on Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and apply this assay together with conventional microneutralisation (MN) tests to investigate 1343 human and 625 animal sera. The sera were collected in Egypt as a region adjacent to areas where MERS has been described, and in Hong Kong, China as a control region. Sera from dromedary camels had a high prevalence of antibody reactive to MERS-CoV by MERS NT (93.6 percent) and MERS ppNT (98.2 percent) assay. The antibody titres ranged up to 1280 and higher in MN assays and 10 240 and higher in ppNT assays. No other investigated species had any antibody reactivity to MERS-CoV. While seropositivity does not exclude the possibility of infection with a closely related virus, our data highlight the need to attempt detection of MERS-CoV or related coronaviruses in dromedary camels. The data show excellent correlation between the conventional MN assay and the novel ppNT assay. The newly developed ppNT assay does not require Biosafety Level 3 containment and is thus a relatively high-throughput assay, well suited for large-scale seroepidemiology studies which are needed to better understand the ecology and epidemiology of MERS-CoV.

[For the 5 chapters, Introduction, Methods, Virus and virus titration, Microneutralisation tests, MERS-CoV spike pseudoparticle neutralisation assay, and Results, as well as for the references, please refer to the original article at the source URL.]

Discussion
----------
Of 1968 human and animal sera tested by MERS-CoV MN and 325 human and animal sera tested by MERS-CoV ppNT assays, only sera from dromedary camels had any neutralising antibody activity to the MERS-CoV. Of the 110 camel sera, 93.6 percent were seropositive by MERS-CoV MN test and 98.2 percent were seropositive by MERS-CoV ppNT test. The antibody titres were very high in MN as well as ppNT, suggesting that the virus infecting these camels was MERS-CoV virus itself or a very closely related virus.

It is known that dromedary camels host bovine coronaviruses (BCoV) which are lineage A beta-coronaviruses. However cross-neutralisation between MERS-CoV (lineage C beta-coronavirus) and BCoV was excluded by Reusken and colleagues in their study of sera from dromedary camels [see posting 20130809.1872008]. Furthermore, BCoV is antigenically closely related to the human coronavirus OC43. Human beta-coronavirus lineage A viruses OC43 and HKU1, and alpha-coronaviruses (229E and NL63) are ubiquitous respiratory viruses infecting humans and the panel of human sera of different ages tested can be expected to have varying levels of antibody to these viruses. The lack of any MERS-neutralising activity in the human sera we studied also indicates that the MN and ppNT assays are specific for MERS-CoV. The lack of cross-reactivity with convalescent serum from patients with SARS provides additional evidence of the lack of cross-reactivity in the MERS-CoV serology assays. Furthermore, it is notable that the camel sera with high antibody titres to MERS-CoV did not cross-react with SARS-CoV, a beta-coronavirus of lineage B. Taken together these data indicate that a MERS-CoV or a highly related virus is endemic in dromedary camels imported for slaughter in Egypt. These findings provide independent confirmation of the results recently reported by Reusken et al. who found very high antibody titres to MERS-CoV in dromedary camels [ProMED-mail posting 20130809.1872008].

The dromedary camels sampled in our study were those brought to abattoirs for slaughter in Cairo and in the Qalyubia governorate in the Nile Delta region. These animals were sourced from other East African countries such as Sudan and held in Egypt for some time prior to slaughter. Thus it is unclear where the animals originally acquired the infection. Considering the similar data from dromedary camels in Oman and the Canary Islands, it is likely that this coronavirus is widespread in North and East Africa and the Arabian peninsula.

There is substantial movement of people between Egypt and Saudi Arabia and other states on the Arabian peninsula, and thus it is possible that people may get infected, either as part of their travel to endemic areas or through zoonotic transmission within the country. There is also much movement of livestock across these Middle Eastern countries. The lack of antibody to MERS-CoV in sera of people resident in Egypt indicates that this infection is not common in Egypt, either as an infection acquired through travel or as an occasional zoonotic infection.

The MERS-CoV ppNT assay described here is a safe and specific assay for large scale seroepidemiological studies in a range of animal species, and such studies are urgently needed in regions where MERS-CoV cases have been detected as well as other regions. The HIV backbone used for pseudoparticle production is not replication-competent and the MERS-CoV pseudoparticles can therefore be produced and used in Biosafety Level 2 containment; in contrast, MN assays involve handling of the live MERS-CoV and require Biosafety Level 3 containment which is not always available in affected regions. Unlike immunoassays, there is no requirement for finding and optimising an enzyme-labelled anti-Ig conjugate for each species to be investigated. Furthermore, the MERS-CoV ppNT assay appears around 10 times more sensitive than the conventional MN assay (Figure 3, Table 2). The MN assay is a neutralisation assay based on TCID50 rather than a plaque reduction assay, which perhaps makes it less sensitive than a plaque neutralisation assay. In any event, experience with influenza virus serology using pseudoparticle assays has shown that they are more sensitive than conventional MN assays for detecting neutralising antibodies. Thus MERS-CoV ppNT can be used as a screening assay, and positive sera can be retested for confirmation in a MERS MN tests.

Serological data does not provide proof that the virus infecting dromedary camels is the MERS-CoV, and infection by a closely related coronavirus or a chimeric virus with a MERS-CoV-like spike protein cannot be ruled out until the dromedary camel virus is detected and genetically sequenced. However, it provides a strong impetus to attempt to seek the virus in specimens from these animals and to identify the MERS-related virus that appears to be infecting them. These serological studies also need to be extended to other domestic animals species to define the circulation of MERS-CoV or related viruses in animals in close contact with humans. Such studies should also include humans exposed to dromedary camels. It is important to note that waning antibody levels may result in false-negative serology results, and this is particularly relevant in mild or asymptomatic episodes of infection where the peak antibody titre may be lower and drop more quickly.

If the detection of MERS-CoV in insectivorous bats is confirmed [ProMED-mail posting 20130822.1895035] and if indeed the coronavirus we and others demonstrated to be common in dromedary camels is confirmed to be MERS-CoV, we will have a scenario of a virus reservoir in bats with a peridomestic animal such as the camel as intermediate host, which may in fact be the immediate source of human infection. It is notable that a number of index cases with MERS-CoV had a history of exposure to camels, although this is by no means universally the case. Given that the MERS-like coronavirus in camels appears to be ubiquitous, it remains to be explained why MERS in humans appears relatively rare. Coronaviruses are well known to mutate to markedly change virulence or host range. Examples are the emergence of the less pathogenic porcine respiratory coronavirus from virulent transmissible gastroenteritis virus of pigs, or virulent feline infectious peritonitis viruses emerging from low pathogenic feline coronaviruses. Furthermore, the SARS-like virus detected in civets and other small mammals in live animal markets in southern China in 2002/2003 initially appeared to infect humans, who appear to have seroconverted, but with minimal disease and onward transmission, while a few amino acid changes in the SARS-CoV spike protein allowed that virus to acquire efficient transmissibility and virulence in humans. Thus, previous experience with animal and human coronaviruses highlights the public health urgency of investigations of MERS-CoV and MERS-CoV-like viruses in domestic and wild animals.

Authors: Perera RA, Wang P, Gomaa MR, El-Shesheny R, Kandeil A, Bagato O, Siu LY, Shehata MM, Kayed AS, Moatasim Y, Li M, Poon LL, Guan Y, Webby RJ, Ali MA, Peiris JS & Kayali G.

Date of submission: 26 Aug 2013

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[Egypt is one of the world's major importers of live camels for slaughter. Most of them travel or walk by land from Sudan to the Egyptian main slaughterhouses, particularly in the Cairo area. However, according to FAO's international trade statistics, Djibouti and Ethiopia have their share in the Egyptian imports. During 2011, Djibouti exported 75 909 camels to Egypt and Ethiopia exported 9822.

In some countries, including Saudi Arabia, camel milk is a commodity gaining popularity. In case involvement of camels as a potential source of human infection is established, the possibility of viraemic animals spreading the virus through their meat and/or milk deserve to be studied.

It will be interesting to note if experimental infection trials in animals, including camels (or smaller Camelidae?) are being considered. In view of the pathogenicity of the MERS-CoV for humans, such trials will require the utilisation of high-safety containment (expensive) facilities. - Mod.AS]

[This moderator can't help but wonder that if there is such a high level of infection of camels with presumed origin of Sudan, Oman, Djibouti and Ethiopia, why haven't there been reports of cases out of these countries? Have there been reports of sporadic severe respiratory disease cases in these countries? Are there the capabilities to identify cases of SARI (severe acute respiratory infections) and obtain adequate specimens to confirm infection with the MERS-CoV in these countries?

While this moderator does believe in the adage "seek and ye shall find" and its corollary "don't look and it ain't there"... surely by now someone should have found a case if there is such a high penetration of infection of the camels in close proximity to humans in these countries. - Mod.MPP]
See Also
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (66): animal reservoir, discussion 20130904.1922998
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (61): animal reservoir, bat, comment 20130828.1907567
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (57): animal reservoir, bats 20130822.1895035
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (54): feline reservoir susp, RFI 20130815.1882273
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranan (53): animal reservoir, serology, FAO 20130811.1875301
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (52): animal reservoir, research, serology 20130809.1872008
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (50): animal reservoir, OIE 20130727.1849047
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (48): animal reservoir, bat susp 20130725.1844412
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (39): animal reservoir, research 20130706.1810714
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (10): animal reservoir, research 20130524.1735984
MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (03): animal reservoir, RFI 20130519.1723544
.................................................arn/je/mpp/je/mpp
</body>
