<header id=022025>
Published Date: 2016-06-16 06:15:22 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Salmonid rickettsial septicemia - Chile
Archive Number: 20160616.4290433
</header>
<body id=022025>
SALMONID RICKETTSIAL SEPTICEMIA - CHILE
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 14 Jun 2016 9:48 AM
Source: EcoWatch [edited]
http://ecowatch.com/2016/06/14/chile-farmed-salmon-antibiotics/


The Chilean salmon industry's rampant use of antibiotics is once again under the microscope after a new report revealed that salmon producers are using record levels of the drugs to treat stocks suffering from salmonid rickettsial septicemia (SRS).

Following a Chile Appeals Court order, the National Fisheries and Aquaculture Service (Sernapesca) revealed that the country's salmon producers used 557 tonnes of antibiotics in 2015, with consumption rate per tonne of salmon reaching its highest point in the last 9 years at 660 grams per tonne. The previous high was 640 grams per tonne in 2007. Usage was as low as 310 grams per tonne in 2010, Undercurrent News noted. The newest figures were compiled from 46 companies that operate in both freshwater and sea water.

SRS, or piscirickettsiosis, causes lesions, hemorrhaging and swollen kidneys and spleens in the salmon, and can ultimately lead to death. Chilean farmers have used ever-increasing amounts of antibiotics to try and keep their stocks healthy.

However, concerns over drug-resistant superbugs are driving away American consumers and retailers who seek antibiotic-free products. Last year [2015], Costco spurned the South American country's farmed salmon, opting instead for farmed salmon from Norway, whose farmers use far less antibiotics.

Environmentalists have criticized salmon aquaculture, aka fish farming, as the carnivorous fish are fed animal-derived proteins called "fish meal," or fish oil made from anchovies, which have been shown to carry polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and other toxins that can make their way into the human food supply.

Environmentalists also warn that farmed salmon can escape from the oceanside pens they are raised in, potentially spreading disease or unwanted genes to enter wild populations already under stress from overfishing, pollution, and shrinking habitats.

"It's fair to say that salmon farming is better than it used to be, but it used to be horrendous," wrote Oceana contributor Justine Hausheer. "Even the best farms still pollute their waters with parasiticides, chemicals, and fish feces. The Chilean farmed salmon industry uses over 300 000 kilograms [about 661 400 lb] of antibiotics a year, causing bacterial resistances that affect fish, the environment, and human beings."

Christine Bornes, adviser to the Norwegian Food Safety Authority, told Chilean publication La Tercera after the release of the latest antibiotics figures that it is important to reduce use of the substance due to drug resistance which can be transferred to humans, according to Fish Information Services.

Alicia Gallardo, deputy director of Aquaculture in Sernapesca, said, "These vaccines have not been successful in preventing SRS -- the main disease affecting salmon -- which accounts for more than 90 percent of all antibiotic treatments in salmon farming." The official added that Sernapesca will enact additional measures to regulate antibiotics use.

Over in the US, the overuse of antibiotics can lead to antibiotic-resistant bacteria, fueling a devastating and expensive "superbug" crisis. About 70 percent of the antibiotics used in the US are deployed in livestock production, which "can directly or indirectly result in antibiotic resistant infections in humans," the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states. [The amount of antibiotic is relatively less based on the poundage of meat produced vs that of the fish. - Mod.TG]

The superbug crisis has been linked to 23 000 human deaths and 2 million illnesses annually in the US at a price of USD 20 billion in direct costs.

Studies have found that antibiotics have worked their way into our waterways and leached into soil, also causing the proliferation of resistant bacteria.

"Antibiotics are having an effect even after they are outside of the animal," Gail Hansen, DVM, MPH, a senior officer with the Pew Charitable Trusts, told WebMD.

Last month [May 2016], scientists announced the alarming discovery of the 1st instance of a person living in the US infected with a feared antibiotic-resistant microbe.

"Unless we take dramatic measures now to transform animal agriculture, we risk a world where antibiotics don't work, more incurable bacterial infections in people and a rising death toll," Emily Cassidy of the Environmental Working Group wrote.

Chile is the 2nd largest producer of salmon in the world. Not only has the country's salmon farming industry been criticized for its staggering use of antibiotics, it is also reeling from a deadly and ongoing algal bloom in its coastal waters that has caused the death of more than 23 million fish -- or 15 percent of the country's salmon production. The total economic blow from lost production is at least USD 800 million, Reuters reported.

[Byline: Lorraine Chow]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This article raises several red flags: (pisci)rickettsia-like organisms (RLO), an abundant overuse of antibiotics, water contamination, and PCB's. None of these are good for the health of the fish or for the terminal consumer of their meat.

It seems this article started off regarding the fishing industry in Chile and migrated to one of antibiotic resistance. While antibiotic resistance is an issue this article should not have deviated from its purpose of alerting the readership to the issues facing the fish farms in Chile.

SRS was first reported, from Chile, in 1989, but (pisci)rickettsia-like organisms (RLO) are now frequently associated with disease syndromes in both salmonid and non-salmonid fish from both fresh and saltwater worldwide. During 1989, this disease was considered to be the cause of death of an estimated 1.5 million Coho salmon, many near market-size. A year later, the disease was also found to occur in Atlantic salmon and up to 90 percent mortality was seen on some farms. Outbreaks of SRS in other countries have not reached the levels of the Chilean outbreaks. For example, variable and inconsistent mortality of 0.6-15 percent has been reported in Canada and Norway.

SRS is caused by the Gram-negative bacterium _Piscirickettsia salmonis_. This was the 1st "rickettsia-like" bacterium to be recognized as a pathogen of fish. _P. salmonis_ is a non-motile, obligate intracellular bacterium, pleomorphic but predominately coccoid, and 0.5-1.5 microns in diameter. It is currently placed in the class Gammaproteobacteria; order Thiotrichales; and family Piscirickettsiacaea, and has a closer relationship to, for example, _Legionella_ and _Coxiella_, than to members of the genera _Rickettsia_. _P. salmonis_ replicates within membrane-bound cytoplasmic vacuoles in selected fish cell lines and in the cells of tissues throughout infected fish.

_P. salmonis_ is the 1st of the RLO of fish to be fully characterized. Since it's recognition, the impact of RLO in fish has become increasingly apparent. Growing awareness of the emergence of these intracellular organisms has led to the discovery of rickettsial diseases among diverse species of fish from different geographic locations and aquatic environments. The source, reservoir, and mode of transmission of many of these agents, as well as consistently effective methods of disease prevention and control, remain to be established.

Host range, geographic distribution SRS disease in Chile typically occurs in marine waters during the on-growing process from smolt to harvest. It has also been isolated from freshwater cages of Coho salmon and trout. The disease was originally predominant in Coho salmon (_Oncorhynchus kisutch_) but is now recognized to cause serious losses in all farmed salmonid fish species including Atlantic salmon (_Salmo salar_), rainbow (steelhead) trout (_O. mykiss_), Chinook salmon (_O. tshawytscha_), pink salmon (_O. gorbuscha_), and masu salmon (_O. masou_). _Piscirickettsia_ spp are commonly found in fish worldwide (such as, Chile, Canada, Ireland, Scotland, and Norway) but are of major economic importance only in Chile to date. The distribution of _P. salmonis_ and RLO is therefore widespread. Several reports describing RLO infections in non-salmonid finfish exist. For example, about 10 years ago, a RLO was identified as the causative agent of an outbreak with mass mortality among pond-reared tilapia in Taiwan. Also, RLO-related mortalities in juvenile European sea bass at 12-15 deg C [53.6-59 deg F] in sea cages have been reported along the French Mediterranean coast.

At present there are few reports of _P. salmonis_ coming from wild salmonids, although it is likely that the bacterium is present in naturally occurring populations of marine fish. Horizontal transmission has been reported in marine-farmed salmon 2 weeks after the introduction of pathogen-free fish into infected sites. The extended extracellular survival time of this organism in salt water (several weeks at 5-20 deg C [4-68 deg F]) may be of sufficient duration to permit horizontal transmission without a vector. Experimentally it is documented that the bacterium can enter through the intact skin and gills although the mode of entry is still not clear.

The possibility of vertical transmission of _P. salmonis_ now looks more and more likely due to recent research in Chile. Apparently there is an adhesion complex that allows the pathogen to enter the salmon egg. There is even a suggestion that this complex may be involved in fish to fish transmission. Currently, no alternative host has been identified and the source, reservoir, and means of transmission of _P. salmonis_ remain important areas of research.

The course of the clinical disease is typically chronic to subacute in nature with mortalities typically developing 10-12 weeks after the transfer of fish to seawater and lasting approximately 10 weeks before they diminish. Virtually all stocks become infected and usually experience more then one clinical episode, typically in the spring and autumn seasons.

Clinical signs and gross pathology
----------------------------------
SRS can cause high economic losses to the farmers affected, particularly in Chile, as typical cumulative mortality averages 20 percent during the 18-month saltwater production time to harvest. Affected fish are lethargic, dark in colour, anorexic, anaemic with mottled focal lesions within the liver, show respiratory problems, and swim near the surface. The 1st signs observed are often haemorrhages and lesions of the skin. The lesions range from small areas to shallow ulcers up to 2 cm in diameter. Internally, the kidney is swollen and the spleen enlarged. Petechial haemorrhages are found on the swim bladder and viscera. Diagnostic ring-shaped, cream-coloured lesions are present on the livers of chronically infected fish. However, in acute cases, death may be the only gross sign of disease.

Histological changes have been classified into the broad category of necrosis and inflammation. Inflammatory cells, fibrosis, a generalized coagulative necrosis, tubular degeneration and necrosis of the endothelium infiltrate the liver, spleen, intestine and haematopoietic cells of the kidney. Moribund fish are anaemic and haematocrit is often 20 percent to 50 percent of normal. The rickettsial organism infects a variety of cells, including circulating macrophages, in which they can replicate and cause cell lyses. It also enters brain tissue, thus affecting swimming ability. The mechanisms by which _P. salmonis_ can enter target cells, avoid intracellular killing, and survive inside the host are unclear. [This last sentence is critical as then we must ask why are the fish being treated with antibiotics? - Mod.TG]

An initial diagnosis of piscirickettsiosis can be made from gross lesions and is supported by the examination of tissue sections. Confirmation of the diagnosis requires isolation and/or serological identification of the causative organism. Kidney tissue from affected fish is aseptically removed, homogenized, and inoculated on a cell monolayer with an antibiotic-free growth media. _P. salmonis_ has been cultured in many (mostly salmonid) fish cell lines maintained in buffered Eagle's minimum essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 10 percent foetal bovine serum.

Optimal in vitro growth occurs at 15-18 deg C [59-64.4 deg F] but is retarded above 20 deg C [68 deg F] and below 10 deg C [50 deg F]. [Due in part to this thermal range, there is no indication that _P. salmonis_ or other RLO of fish cause disease in humans or other mammals. - Mod.TG] Typically, _P. salmonis_ isolation and growth is determined by the gradual appearance of a typical cytopathic effect (CPE) in cell monolayers. The 1st signs of a CPE consist of the formation of cell clusters about 10 days post-inoculation. The infected cells in the clusters typically round up and develop one or more large vacuoles within the cytoplasm. Inoculated cell cultures should be observed for up to 28 days before they are considered negative. An indirect fluorescent antibody technique (IFAT) and immunohistochemistry have been developed as alternative procedures to detect _P. salmonis_. These latter techniques are faster and more specific than histochemical staining. However, they require additional specialized equipment and are more expensive. The detection of _P. salmonis_ in cultivated salmonids via a nested PCR using universal primer is coming on stream and will be important for diagnosis of this disease.

In vitro, _P. salmonis_ is sensitive to a variety of antibiotics including streptomycin, gentamicin, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, and oxytetracycline, but shows resistance to penicillin, penicillin G, and spectinomycin. However, the use of medicated feed to control intracellular pathogens, including _P. salmonis_, has been largely unsuccessful, possibly because antibiotic levels may not reach sufficient concentrations within the host cells in vivo. However, injection of broodstock with antibiotics before leaving seawater in order to control the typical "summer SRS outbreak" is common.

Vaccine development
--------------------
Although commercial vaccines against _P. salmonis_ are very recently available, there is little published information or field experience on their efficacy or economic value. However, several institutes and pharmaceutical companies, including Intervet, have active research programmes directed towards developing efficacious vaccines.

Outbreaks frequently occur after smolt transfer to seawater, but good management practices do help. Such approaches include the early removal of mortalities and clinically diseased fish, with appropriate sanitary disposal of blood from harvested fish, reducing fish stocking density, and providing periods of site fallowing. Other strategic measures include routine screening of broodstock, rejection of eggs from positive fish, and individual incubation of egg batches. Further information regarding horizontal and vertical transmission, pathogenesis, intracellular survival, and immunogenesis is needed to support future control strategies. In addition, information on the geographic location and species distribution of _P. salmonis_ among isolates and stocks of fish will be helpful in developing management and control strategies in the future.

References
----------
1. Bruno DW, Woo PTK: Sporadic, emerging diseases and disorders. In: Diseases and disorders of finfish in cage culture. Woo PTK, Bruno DW, Lim LHS (eds.) CAB International. pp. 305-43, 2002.
2. Fryer JL, Mauel MJ: The Rickettsia: an emerging group of pathogens in fish. In: Emerging Infectious Diseases, Vol. 3, No. 2 April-June 1997 pp. 137-144.
3. Kent ML, Poppe TT: Infectious diseases of coldwater fish in marine and brackish water. In: Diseases and disorders of finfish in cage culture. Woo PTK, Bruno DW, Lim LHS (eds.) CAB International. pp. 61-105, 2002.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.thefishsite.com/diseaseinfo/12/salmonid-rickettsial-septicaemia/. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4290433,7.]

.................................................sb/tg/mj/ml
</body>
