<header id=064111>
Published Date: 2013-03-20 13:19:14 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Chemical weapons - Syria: claims of civilian losses
Archive Number: 20130320.1595751
</header>
<body id=064111>
CHEMICAL WEAPONS - SYRIA: CLAIMS OF CIVILIAN LOSSES
***************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: 19 Mar 2013
Source: New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/20/world/middleeast/syria-developments.html?_r=0


The Syrian government and Syrian rebels traded accusations about a lethal attack in the northern province of Aleppo on Tuesday [19 Mar 2013], in which each side in the country's 2-year-old conflict said the other had used chemical weapons. But neither side presented clear documentation, and 2 American officials said there was no evidence to suggest that any chemical weapons had been used. A Defense Department official said the claim should be treated with caution, if not outright skepticism.

The 1st report came from the Syrian state news agency, SANA, which reported that terrorists, its term for armed rebels, had fired a rocket "containing chemical materials" into the Khan al-Assal area of Aleppo Province, killing 16 people and wounding 86. It later raised the death toll to 25. The news agency displayed photographs of what it said were the victims, but there was no indication in the photographs that they had suffered a chemical attack, like burns or skin discoloration or quarantine measures.

A senior rebel commander and spokesman, Qassem Saadeddine, later accused the government of using chemical weapons in the attack, citing reports of breathing difficulties and bluish skin among victims, but admitted that the reports were secondhand and that he could not provide documentation.

Another rebel commander, Abdul Jabbar al-Okaidi, head of the rebel military council in Aleppo, said in a telephone interview that he had witnessed the attack, describing it as an errant strike on a government-controlled neighborhood by Syrian warplanes flying at high altitude. He said the explosions from the attack emitted what he described as a gas that appeared to cause suffocation, and that some victims had been treated in a rebel field hospital. The commander ridiculed government assertions that the rebels had chemical weapons. "We don't even have ammunition for our Kalashnikovs," he said.

Each side in Syria's conflict has an incentive to accuse the other of using chemical weapons. President Obama has said that a chemical attack by President Bashar al-Assad's government would cross a "red line" that could prompt military intervention by the United States.

The Syrian government seeks to portray its opponents as extremists who are a threat to regional stability. Israel has said it would intervene to prevent chemical weapons from falling into the hands of either the rebels or Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group allied with the Syrian government. Use or seizure of chemical weapons by rebel forces would embarrass the United States, particularly now, as President Obama has declared he will not oppose allied efforts to provide them with military aid.

Rebel factions have accused the government of using chemical weapons many times, with no confirmed cases. The term "chemical weapons" has sometimes appeared to be used loosely to include not just deadly nerve agents like sarin gas but also tear gas and other nonlethal irritants used for crowd control.

The Foreign Ministry of Russia, Mr. Assad's most powerful international backer, indicated that it was taking the government's claim seriously, calling the supposed use of chemical weapons by the opposition an "extremely dangerous development" and a new reason to refocus energy on finding a political solution to the conflict.

A Syrian official told state television that the Aleppo attack would be reported to human rights organizations and to countries that support the rebels.

A Reuters photographer was quoted in a report by the news agency as saying that he had visited victims in Aleppo hospitals and that they had breathing problems. "I saw mostly women and children," said the photographer, who Reuters said it could not identify out of concern for his safety. "They said that people were suffocating in the streets and the air smelled strongly of chlorine."

Rebels have long tried, without success, to overrun a weapons plant near Safira, in Aleppo Province, where chemical weapons are believed to be stored. The Syrian government said in December 2012 that rebels had plundered supplies of chlorine gas, but the government's stores are believed by American officials to consist of other types of chemical weapons.

An Obama administration official said the White House had "no information suggesting opposition groups have chemical weapons capability."

Some American officials worried aloud about whether the Syrian government was accusing rebels of using the weapons to prepare cover for its own future use of them. Anti-government activists suggested that the government might have concocted the chemical attack story to cover up an episode in which it accidentally fired a Scud missile on a government-held area.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an anti-Assad group based in Britain that has a network of contacts in Syria, said that 16 government soldiers and 10 civilians had been killed after a rocket landed on Khan al-Assal. Activists said that the government had tried to hit the police academy there, which had recently been taken by rebel forces, with a Scud missile, but that it accidentally fell on a government-controlled area instead.

In Washington, the White House cast doubt on claims that the opposition had used chemical weapons and said it was evaluating the possibility that the government had used them. "We're looking carefully at allegations of C. W. use, chemical weapons use," said Jay Carney, the White House press secretary. He said the administration was "deeply skeptical" of the assertions by President Assad's government that the opposition had mounted a chemical attack.

At the State Department, a spokeswoman also dismissed the Syrian government's claim as an effort to distract from its use of long-range Scud missiles against civilians. The spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, said the United States was looking into rebel claims that the government had used chemical weapons and tried to blame its opponents.

Another American official said that officials do not believe a chemical attack took place, but that they are "nervous" about what the Syrian government may be thinking. The officials spoke anonymously because of the delicacy of talking about chemical weapons intelligence.

At the United Nations, diplomats reacted to the unverified reports with caution, although they did not totally discount the possibility. Sir Mark Lyall Grant, the British ambassador, told reporters that "clearly if chemical weapons were used then that would be abhorrent, and it would require a serious response from the international community."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: 20 Mar 2013
Source: Humanitarian Resource Institute [edited]
http://www.humanitarian.net/idin/ref/1272012IDIN.html


Independent reports from the field and from Aleppo Medical Council indicated that the gas caused respiratory and neurologic symptoms and death. Doctors who treated the patients in the Aleppo university hospital and Al-Rajaa hospital think that the gas used caused cholinergic effects that can be reversed by physostigmine. According to the Aleppo medical council, doctors from the field described the presenting signs and symptoms as the following: acute bronchospasm, acute respiratory distress and pulmonary edema requiring intubation, hypotension and severe miosis (pinpoint pupils). Patients were treated with atropine, oxygen and mechanical ventilation.

The Syrian American Medical Society (SAMS) condemns the use of chemical weapons and calls for protection of civilians.

Reports from the field indicate the launching of a deadly chemical attack on a civilian area of Khan Al-Assal this morning [20 Mar 2013] which led to the deaths of at least 26 people and injured more than 100 people by initial estimate, mostly women and children. At least 54 cases arrived to Aleppo university hospital; 14 cases died, and 7 are in critical condition, in addition to 7 injuries to medical personnel including an anesthesiologist. Al-Rajaa hospital received 40 similar cases and reported at least 3 fatalities. Eyewitnesses saw "pink smoke" after, presumably, a rocket hit the area and stated that people were dying in the streets and in their houses.

Doctors on the ground describe a great fear of more attacks and a lack of preparedness in emergency response and medical facilities in addition to shortage of medications, protective masks, and antidotes such as atropine and physostigmine. According to a Reuter's photographer, victims he had visited in Aleppo hospitals were suffering breathing problems, and people said they could smell chlorine after the attack.

There were reports of potential use of Agent 15 in Homs in August 2012. Syria is known to have a very dangerous stockpile of chemical weapons, including sarin gas and mustard gas, and, according to recent media reports, some of them had been put in usable condition.

The Syrian American Medical Society calls on the US administration and the international community to protect civilians in Syria and to help in preventing further fatal attacks.

The Syrian American Medical Society (SAMS) is an independent, non-profit, professional, medical and humanitarian organization that represents medical professionals of Syrian descent. Through its rich network within the US and in Syria, SAMS organizes annual medical missions to Syria, provides professional and educational programs to Syrian physicians, and organizes donations of medicine and medical supplies to local hospitals and underprivileged families in Syria and North America.

--
Communicated by:
Stephen M. Apatow
Founder, Director of Research & Development
Humanitarian Resource Institute (UN:NGO:DESA)
Humanitarian University Consortium Graduate Studies
Center for Medicine, Veterinary Medicine & Law
<s.m.apatow@humanitarian.net>

******
[3]
Date: 20 Mar 2013
Source: The Telegraph, London [edited]
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/9943791/Britain-to-airlift-chemical-weapons-detection-kits-to-Syria.html


Britain is to airlift hundreds of chemical weapons detection and protection kits to Syrian rebels as part of its 1st shipment of non-lethal equipment since an EU arms embargo was relaxed to allow battlefield supplies.

Government sources said the equipment from Ministry of Defence stores would allow rebel fighters to detect and identify suspected chemical weapons as they battle against the regime. The shipment was being assembled as senior US politicians heaped pressure on President Barack Obama to intervene in the Syrian civil war following a poison gas attack that killed at least 25 on Tuesday [19 Mar 2013].

David Cameron told the House of Commons that a feeble international reaction was allowing Syria to fall into a Bosnia-style spiral of death.

Syria's regime and its opposition opponents have traded accusations of deploying chemical weapons in the town of Khan al-Assad, near Aleppo. Bashar al-Jafaari, Syria's ambassador to the UN demanded a "specialised, independent, and neutral mission" set-up by Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary General, to investigate the incident. The rebel Syrian National Coalition has also demanded an international inquiry.

British officials see the provision of chemical weapons suits, equipment that monitors the air and analysis sets as a key need for the opposition, officials said. Alongside body armour and armoured vehicles, the suits will be part of the 1st shipment sent within weeks via Turkey to the front line. "Protective equipment in the MoD stores is very effective for activists engaged against the regime on the ground, and if it is known that kits are deployed, we judge it less likely that the regime would use it," said an official involved in the planning. "But if there are chemicals used, it will allow the rebels to detect it accurately and the world to react."

Mr Cameron said the chemical weapons threat was one reason to remove the embargo on the rebels altogether. "I felt sitting round the European Council chamber there was a slight similarity between some of the arguments that were being made about not putting more weapons into Syria that seemed to me to be very familiar to the discussions we had about Bosnia and the appalling events that followed," he said.

Robert Ford, the US Syrian envoy, said America so far had "no evidence to substantiate" claims that chemical weapons had been used and Mr Obama's "red line" crossed. However the administration shared widespread concerns that the pink-white smoke and chlorine smell reported by victims who were struggling to breathe and foaming at the mouth was a chemical material.

The alleged use of chemical weapons prompted senior senators from both parties in Washington to heap pressure on President Barack Obama to intervene. Carl Levin, the Democratic chairman of the Senate armed services committee, called for strikes on the Assad regime's military facilities and for a no-fly zone to be imposed over the country. "There should be the next ratcheting up of military effort, and that would include going after some of Syria's air defences," Mr Levin told Foreign Policy magazine.

John McCain and Lindsey Graham, 2 Republican senators, reiterated their long-standing demand for the US to step in, with Mr Graham even suggesting the US put "boots on the ground."

In an effort to show his regime's resilience, President Assad was pictured at a reception for a Damascus fine arts centre.

King Abdullah II, the Jordanian monarch, warned that President Assad's regime was doomed and that an Islamic fundamentalist state was likely to emerge on his borders. "The most worrying factors in the Syrian conflict are the issues of chemical weapons, the steady flow or sudden surge in refugees, and a jihadist state emerging out of the conflict," the king said.

The cost of the conflict already exceeds USD 500 million and is rising rapidly. An estimated 500 000 Syrian refugees, about 9 per cent of Jordan's population of 6 million, had crossed into Jordan in the last 12 months.

[Byline: Damien McElroy, Jon Swaine]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Whoever and whatever might be to blame, the British government is clearly taking the situation seriously.

Physostigmine is the antidote of choice for _Datura stramonium_ poisoning, or atropine poisoning. It is not usually an antidote for nerve gas or chlorine poisoning. The following article may be of value:

Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol. 1980 Dec;18(12):523-35.
Physostigmine salicylate as an antidote. Daunderer M. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7228447.

Abstract:
"Most poisonings with anticholinergics deal with simple cases without diagnostic or therapeutic difficulties; however, in difficult or unclarified cases, a new method for diagnosis and treatment is the antidote physostigmine salicylate. Within 15 minutes after application of 2 mg of the antidote, the central anticholinergic symptoms disappear, such as respiratory depression, coma, cramps, and hallucinations, as do the peripheral anticholinergic symptoms of cardiac rhythm disturbance, dry mouth, and red dry skin. No fatal overdose with anticholinergic drugs occurs if the antidote is given in time." Thanks also to Corr.SB - Mod.MHJ

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/3aLZ.]

.................................................lm/jw/sb/mhj/msp/lm
</body>
