<header id=033244>
Published Date: 2019-05-21 17:15:38 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Equine piroplasmosis - USA: (TN) horses
Archive Number: 20190521.6480319
</header>
<body id=033244>
EQUINE PIROPLASMOSIS - USA: (TENNESSEE) HORSES
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 20 May 2019
Source: WSMV [edited]
https://www.wsmv.com/news/outbreak-of-equine-piroplasmoisis-detected-in-midstate-horses/article_94540710-7b21-11e9-aab4-e77c29d8f966.html


The state veterinarian's office is investigating an outbreak of equine piroplasmosis [EP] in a group of racing quarter horses in the midstate [Tennessee, USA].

22 horses have tested positive for EP in 5 locations within Bedford, Rutherford, and Williamson counties. The horses are all under quarantine and being treated.

EP is a blood parasite affecting equines. The disease is not contagious to humans. Although it can be transmitted through infected ticks, it is more commonly spread by blood and blood products through the sharing of needles, syringes, or improperly cleaned and disinfected dental, surgical, or blood product equipment between infected and uninfected horses.

It may take as long as 30 days for an infected horse to test positive for the disease after exposure. Early clinical signs can range from weakness and lack of appetite to swelling of limbs and labored breathing. Horses surviving the acute phase continue to carry the parasite for an extended period of time. Horses testing positive for the disease are quarantined and may be euthanized.

Horses will not transmit the disease to other horses through casual contact. However, it is critical horse handlers practice good biosecurity. If a needle is required, use a new sterile needle and syringe on every horse, and clean and disinfect all equipment that may possibly be contaminated with blood.

Some states and equine competitions require EP testing for entrance. If you plan to travel with your horse, check with the receiving state for current import requirements [Your veterinarian can help you do this. - Mod.TG].

The state veterinarian is responsible for monitoring for and preventing the spread of animal disease, as well as promoting animal health in Tennessee. The office works with private veterinarians, animal pathologists, and disease diagnostic laboratories to identify diseases and determine the cause of animal deaths.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

["1. What is Equine Piroplasmosis?
Equine Piroplasmosis (EP) is a tick-borne disease that affects horses, donkeys, mules andzebras. The disease is transmitted via ticks or through mechanical transmission by improperly sanitized surgical, dental or tattoo instruments or through the reuse of needles and syringes. EP is considered to be a foreign animal disease in the U.S., but it occurs in many other areas of the world.

2. How is Equine Piroplasmosis spread?
EP agents are spread by certain species of ticks, which transfer the parasites (_Babesia caballi_ and/or _Babesia_ (Theileria) equi_ from 1 horse to another. Ticks ingest blood from the infected equine and transfer the parasite to an uninfected equine by feeding on the host, spreading the disease through blood contact. Because the disease is spread through blood, EP can also be transmitted through blood transfusion when the source of blood is an infected horse, previously used needles or syringes and other skin penetrating instruments that are contaminated with blood and have not been adequately sanitized between horses (i.e. dental, tattoo and surgical equipment). _B. equi_ can be transmitted from an infected dam to her foal.

3. What are some of the signs of EP?
An infected horse can take 5 to 30 days to show signs of the disease. Mild forms of EP can appear as weakness and lack of appetite. More severe signs include fever, anemia, weight loss, jaundiced mucous membranes, a swollen abdomen (edema fluid accumulation), swelling of the limbs and labored breathing. Other signs of EP can include central nervous system disturbances, roughened hair coats, constipation, colic and hemoglobinuria - a condition which gives urine a reddish or dark brown color to the urine. Chronic infection often results in nonspecific clinical signs such as mild inappetence, poor performance and weight loss. The spleen may be enlarged on rectal examination. Some cases may progress to death. Some infected horses, may however, show few or no signs of disease after infection and may not experience any decreased performance.

Horses that survive the acute phase of infection continue to carry the parasites for long periods of time. These horses, often called chronic carriers, are potential sources of infection for other horses through tick-borne transmission or mechanical transfer by reuse of needles/syringes or surgical, dental or tattoo instruments that have not been adequately sanitized between horses.

4. How is EP diagnosed?
Clinical signs for EP are non-specific and similar to many other diseases and conditions therefore, laboratory tests are needed to make a diagnosis of EP. If EP is suspected, state or federal animal health officials must be notified so they can further investigate the case.

In horses with clinical signs of EP, the parasite may be detected on microscopic examination of a blood smear, but detection of the parasite is not always possible by this method of testing. The most commonly used tests are serologic tests that detect antibodies to the organism in blood. The USDA recognizes the cELISA (competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) as the standard test for screening for EP infection; there is a separate test for _B. caballi_ and _B. equi_. In an outbreak situation, different types of tests are often needed to determine the infection status of a horse.

Several equine events (racetracks and some shows) now require horses be tested for the infection before allowing them to compete. The test used for this purpose is the cELISA test conducted by one of the veterinary diagnostic laboratories in the U.S. approved to conduct the test.

5. How is EP treated?
Treatment of EP cases in the U.S. is only permissible if the horse is enrolled in a USDA supervised research program. Because the goal of treatment of infected horses in the U.S. is to sterilize the infection (completely clear the parasite from the horse) and protocols for this treatment are still being worked out; the treatment of EP cases in the U.S. is to be overseen by USDA and the horse is to be enrolled in the official research program.

6. What are some prevention methods for EP?
Currently all known infected horses are under official quarantine. However, since carrier horses can appear normal and may not have undergone testing, some basic precautions can reduce the risk of transmission of EP agents.

Preventing the transfer of blood between animals through control of ticks and avoiding use of equipment that could be contaminated with blood from previous use is crucial to preventing the transmission of EP.

As of recent, there is only one known area in the U.S., located in southeast Texas, where tick transmission of EP agents has been shown to occur.

In areas where tick transmission has occurred, one method of control is through reducing the risk of horses being exposed to ticks by keeping pastures regularly mowed and by removing brush and weeds to reduce the level of tick infestations.

Chemical control methods are effective in reducing host exposure to ticks, especially when appropriate chemicals are applied at times and locations that will have the greatest impact on developmental stages of the tick, either on or off the host. The most common compounds used in areawide control are carbamate insecticides, natural pyrethrins and synthetic pyrethrins (often called pyrethroids).

In the US, it appears that EP agents have been spread by less than optimal hygiene practices that have resulted in the transfer of blood from an infected horse to another horse. This can be avoided by never reusing needles or syringes and by being certain that dental and tattoo equipment is thoroughly sanitized between horses and that all surgical instruments are sterilized prior to use. In addition, any horse to be used as a blood donor should be tested for EP.

ALWAYS
- Use a new sterile needle and syringe for injections, whether into a vein or muscle or beneath the skin
- Clean and disinfect equine dental, tattoo and surgical equipment between horses
- Have any horse that will serve as a blood donor tested for EP
- Contact your veterinarian if your horse is sick and has signs of fever, reduced feed intake or lethargy
- Check with your State Animal Health Official if you need more specifics about EP

7. Where on my horse should I examine for ticks?
USDA guidance on the inspection of horses for ticks recommends a thorough and systematic examination. The following examination procedure, known as "scratching" for ticks, has been recommended:

- Begin at the horse's head, examine both ears and palpate inside of each ear, examine the false nostrils visually and palpate each with the forefinger.
- Move to the forelock and examine the forelock, continuing down the mane to the withers.
- Examine the soft tissue between the bones that make up the lower jaw, using flattened hand and fingers, feeling for any unevenness of the skin.
- Examine the girth area of one side, visually and through palpation.
- Examine the posterior fetlock to the coronet of the front foot, visually and through palpation.
- Visually examine the udder/scrotum area on one side.
- Examine the tail and perineum, visually and through palpation.
- Examine the posterior fetlock to the coronet of the back foot, visually and through palpation.
- Visually examine the udder/scrotum of the other side.
- Examine the posterior fetlock to the coronet of the other back foot, visually and through palpation.
- Examine the posterior fetlock to the coronet of the other front foot, visually and through palpation.
- Perform hand hygiene after examining each animal.

8. What should I do if I find a tick on my horse?
Some of the common folk methods include applying petroleum jelly, fingernail polish, 70 percent isopropyl alcohol or a hot kitchen match to the attached tick. While these methods are thought to induce a tick to "detach" from an attachment site, they actually stimulate a tick to secrete more saliva, cause regurgitation or introduce other tick-body secretions or excretions into the wound. These procedures increase the risk of secondary infection around the bite location. The best method is to implement the following procedure:
- Using blunt curved forceps or a commercial tick-extraction tool, grasp the tick as close to the skin surface as possible and pull upward with a steady even pressure.
- Avoid squeezing, crushing or puncturing the tick's body. As this can expel material into the attachment site while removing the tick from the host.
- Do not handle the tick with bare hands as ticks carry many kinds of disease on their body that can be harmful to people.
- Cleanse the bite site with soap and water.
Another method of tick removal is spraying the tick with pyrethrins or pyrethroids containing aerosol repellent, and then spraying again within one minute. Ticks will fall off after treatment.

To submit a tick for identification, place the tick in a container of alcohol (optimally 70 percent ethanol or 70 percent isopropyl) and send the specimen to a State or Federal (National Veterinary Services Laboratory) veterinary diagnostic laboratory responsible for tick identification. Samples may also be submitted to regional diagnostic veterinary laboratories where they will then be sent onto the NVSL.

9. If my horse tests positive for _B. caballi_ or _B. equi_, the causative agents of EP, what do I do?
The options for positive horses in the U.S. are lifelong quarantine, euthanasia, export from the U.S. or enrollment in an ongoing treatment research program with oversight by USDA.

Horses that test positive for EP MUST be quarantined. State and Federal animal officials will ensure that quarantine guidelines are being followed and are in place.

Euthanasia for positive horses is not required but lifelong quarantine has led some owners to elect this option. Owners can work with their veterinarian and the animal health officials to determine if export from the U.S. is an option for the positive horse.

Although there are several drugs that have been identified for treatment of EP, the organisms can be refractory to treatment, and the carrier state can be difficult to clear. Treatment of positive horses in the U.S. should only be conducted through enrollment in an ongoing research program. Contact your State or Federal animal health official to find out more about this option.

Owners and their local veterinarians work with State or Federal animal health official to determine if they have a horse eligible for enrollment. Horses enrolled in the research program will remain under quarantine. Horses proven to be cleared of infection through the research treatment program may be eligible for quarantine release in the future.

10. Will a negative test for EP become mandatory for horses that travel (i.e. show, trail, etc.) just as a negative Coggins test?
Beginning 1 Jul 2011, all horses entering the grounds for any AQHA world championship show -- in Oklahoma City, Amarillo or Houston -- owners must present a certified negative EP test, based on a blood test drawn and submitted by an accredited/licensed veterinarian and conducted at an approved diagnostic laboratory. The tests must have been completed within the previous 6 months. [Plan ahead, plan early. - Mod.TG]

NOTE: In making plans to travel with your horse, be sure to contact your veterinarian well in advance of your departure date to verify what is necessary testing and examination for each horse traveling. Be sure to clarify with your veterinarian all blood work being drawn will fulfill all required tests for interstate movement or entry to an event as one test does not cover all requirements. For example, a different test is administered for detection of equine infectious anemia (EIA).

Currently, racetracks in 11 states have testing requirements for EP, and that number will likely increase. Please consult with your state animal health office and/or the racetrack (or individual state racing commission office), show or other equine venue to confirm any EP testing or other health requirements. To find your state animal health official, visit https://www.avma.org/advocacy/stateandlocal/stateanimalhealthofficials/pages/default.aspx or http://www.usaha.org/upload/Federal%20and%20State%20Health/StateAnimalHealthOfficials_rev.pdf.

**Testing policies may vary from state to state so be sure to check with your state veterinarian medical association for the policies affecting your area.

Whenever transporting a horse interstate check the requirements for the state of destination regarding what tests and examinations are required. Your veterinarian will need to collect samples and examine your horse to meet any requirements so work closely with them and let them know well in advance your plans to move your horse so that all requirements can be completed in advance of your departure date.

DID YOU KNOW? Ticks are commonly thought of as insects but are actually arachnids, such as scorpions, spiders and mites. All members of this group have 4 pairs of legs as adults with no antennae. Ticks are among the most efficient carriers of disease agents because they attach firmly to a host when sucking blood, feeding slowly and may go unnoticed for a considerable amount of time while feeding. There are at least 850 tick species worldwide and approximately 85 tick species within the U.S."

Extracted from: AAEP https://aaep.org/horsehealth/faq-regarding-equine-piroplasmosis-ep. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map available at:
Tennessee, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6480319,244]
See Also
Equine infectious anemia & equine piroplasmosis - USA: (TX) horse 20190215.6319633
2016
--
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (04): (WY) 20160905.4467114
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (03): (TN) 20160826.4442464
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (02): (TN) 20160813.4413504
Equine piroplasmosis - USA: (NM) 20160321.4107720
2013
----
Equine piroplasmosis - USA: (TX) 20130521.1727066
2012
----
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (TX) 20120519.1137799
2010
----
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (08): update 20101009.3667
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (07): (NC) 20100814.2792
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (06): (NM) OIE 20100721.2443
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (05): (NM) OIE 20100627.2150
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (04): (TX, TX ex NM) 20100607.1892
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (03): (TX, UT) 20100205.0395
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (02): (TX) 20100130.0322
Equine piroplasmosis - USA 20100129.0309
2009
----
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (12): (NM) 20091230.4394
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (11): multi-state 20091203.4128
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (10) 20091117.3963
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (09): (NJ ex TX) 20091111.3912
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (08): (TX) alert 20091030.3749
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (07): (TX) 20091024.3675
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (06): (TX) OIE 20091022.3631
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (05): (TX) 20091021.3617
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (04): (KS, MO) resolved 20090917.3262
Piroplasmosis, equine - USA (02): (MO) 20090612.2172
Equine piroplasmosis - USA: (FL) quarantine lifted 20090225.0771
2008
----
Piroplasmosis, equine - USA (04): (FL) 20080930.3088
Piroplasmosis, equine - USA: (03) (FL) 20080828.2687
Equine piroplasmosis - USA (02): (FL) 20080823.2626
Equine piroplasmosis - USA: (FL) 20080819.2579
1996
----
Equine piroplasmosis - Georgia (USA) (2) 19960116.0097
Equine piroplasmosis - Georgia (USA) 19960112.0066
.................................................sb/tg/msp/dk
</body>
