<header id=035980>
Published Date: 2014-10-24 13:20:06 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Psittacosis - Sweden: (KR) human-to-human spread, 2013
Archive Number: 20141024.2894265
</header>
<body id=035980>
PSITTACOSIS - SWEDEN: (KRONOBERG) HUMAN-TO-HUMAN SPREAD, 2013
*************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 23 Oct 2014
Source: Eurosurveillance 2014;19(42) [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20937


Psittacosis is an infectious disease caused by _Chlamydia [now _Chlamydophila_ - Mod.LL] psittaci_, a strict intracellular bacterium. Typical symptoms include abrupt onset of fever, rigors, headache, myalgia, malaise, cough which usually is unproductive and atypical pneumonia [1-2]. Birds are the natural host for the bacterium but other animals including humans can get infected. Humans can get infected after contact with birds by inhaling dried contaminated bird secretions, dried-out droppings or dust from feathers [3]. The incubation period is approximately 1 to 4 weeks. Most infected people only experience mild influenza-like disease but severe illness can occur. The disease, which is notifiable by law in Sweden, is not common, with only 5 to 10 cases reported yearly in the years preceding 2013 [4].

Cases are usually sporadic without epidemiological links to a common source. Between January and March 2013, there was an unusual increase in psittacosis cases in southern Sweden, when a total of 17 sporadic cases of psittacosis were reported, distributed across 4 counties. The annual number of cases in these counties had ranged from 1 to 6 during the 10 preceding years. The primary case in this report was one of the sporadic cases. Investigations revealed that the main risk factor for the sporadic cases was exposure to wild birds and their droppings, as previously reported by Rehn et al [5]. The increase in cases was suggested to have been due to weather factors that increased the secretion from affected birds, an unusual epizootic among wild birds, or a more transmissible strain.

Person-to-person transmission of _C. psittaci_ has previously not been considered as an important pathway for transmission. It has only been described in 2 suspected episodes in the literature. In a report from 1977, a patient suffering from pneumonia believed to have been caused by _C. psittaci_ transmitted the disease to his son, a neighbour, another patient and to 8 hospital staff [6]. However, at the time of this study, the existing serological tests could not discriminate between _C. psittaci_ and _C. pneumoniae_. In light of this and the fact that _C. pneumoniae_ is known to spread readily between humans, it is questionable whether the outbreak was caused by _C. psittaci_. This issue has also been discussed by the USA CDC [7]. There is, however, a recent documented outbreak with person-to-person transmission of psittacosis [8] that occurred in Scotland in 2012. In the outbreak, the primary case had pneumonia and transmitted the infection to 5 others. 4 of these were family contacts and 1 was a healthcare worker.

Outbreak description
--------------------
On 23 Jan 2013, the communicable disease control unit in Kronoberg County, Sweden, was notified of a patient hospitalised with severe psittacosis. After 2 weeks, more cases of psittacosis were reported, all with an obvious epidemiological link to the primary case. An investigation was started in order to look into the possibility and magnitude of human-to-human transmission.

The primary case, a 73 year old man was admitted to hospital on 13 Jan 2013 with a 3-day history of chills and fever. X-ray imaging showed signs of pneumonia and the patient received intravenous cefotaxime treatment. Despite antibiotic treatment, his condition worsened during the next couple of days. His body temperature rose to above 40 degrees C and his oxygen saturation fell from 95 per cent to 80 per cent. After 3 days he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and given moxifloxacin as additional treatment. A bronchoscopy was performed in the ICU and samples from bronchoalveolar lavage was sent for microbiological analysis. Test results came back positive for _C. psittaci_ by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) but negative for _Legionella pneumoniae_, _Mycoplasma pneumoniae_, influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus and general bacterial culture. After only 1 day in ICU he had to be transferred to a university hospital for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) treatment where he was treated for 26 days, after which time he was moved back to the local ICU where he died a month later.

On 25 Jan 2013, an assistant nurse, who had been taking care of the primary case in the ICU on 18 Jan 2013, fell ill in what she believed was influenza. After 4 days with high fever she was admitted to hospital with atypical pneumonia and was diagnosed with psittacosis by PCR.

The same day, 25 Jan 2013, a doctor who had also worked in the ICU on 18 Jan 2013 fell ill with similar symptoms as the assistant nurse. At that time he was off duty, and suspecting psittacosis, started to treat himself with doxycycline without taking any tests. When he came back to work on 11 Feb 2013 he still had a high C-reactive protein level of 230 mg/l (normal less than 5 mg/l). Initial serological investigation was negative but on repeated sampling he showed evidence of past infection. The doctor who performed the bronchoscopy also self-treated with antibiotics as soon as he learned of the diagnosis and did not develop any symptoms.

On 28 Jan 2013, an 89 year old man was diagnosed with pneumonia at the same hospital after falling ill with fever and chills 2 days earlier. He was admitted and tested positive for psittacosis by PCR. This man had shared a hospital room with the primary case from 14 to 17 Jan 2013 while he was being treated for a cerebral infarction.

On 1 Feb 2013, both the primary case's wife and their son fell ill. Their son lived in the same house as the primary case and his wife. The son showed symptoms compatible with psittacosis, with chills, fever, headache and coughing and received treatment from his local general practitioner. Serological investigation showed evidence of acute infection. The wife of the primary case developed more serious symptoms with high fever and syncope and was admitted to hospital. Her serological test was initially negative but after 1 month she showed evidence of having had a _C. psittaci_ infection.

Between 28 Jan and 5 Feb 2013, 5 additional staff fell ill on the ward where the primary case was treated before he was transmitted to the ICU. 4 were assistant nurses who had been tending to the primary case. The 5th was an assistant nurse who could not remember if she had tended to the primary case, but it is likely that she assisted the nurse responsible for the patient on 1 occasion. All 5 at 1st experienced chills, fever, headache and myalgia. As influenza was circulating at this time, they initially believed they had influenza. However, they were all subsequently diagnosed with pneumonia and 3 of them were admitted to hospital. When tested, they were negative for influenza, but 3 showed an acute serological response to _C. psittaci_, 1 showed signs of infection in follow-up and 1 was negative in all testing.

Methods [see original URL - Mod.LL]

Results
-------
Epidemiological investigation:
Interviews with the primary case and relatives regarding potential risk factors for psittacosis revealed that the primary case had cleaned a garden bird feeder indoors 2 weeks before signs of disease. No other connection with domestic or wild birds or their droppings could be identified. He did not live close to a poultry farm or other bird holding. The primary case's son helped to feed the birds when his father was hospitalized. When the father was diagnosed, his son removed the bird feeder and destroyed it by burning. This took place 12 days before the son himself fell ill. The primary case's wife did not have contact with the birds or the bird feeder.

None of other cases had any history of bird exposure before falling ill except for one of the ICU nurses whose boyfriend had a parrot that she had helped to feed. They did not live close to poultry farms or similar.

In total, in addition to the primary case, 6 confirmed, 3 probable and 1 possible secondary case of psittacosis were identified. 3 of these additional cases were male and the median age was 54 years, (range 33-89 years). Case details are summarised in the Table and Figure [for figure and table, see original URL - Mod.LL]. 6 of the secondary cases were hospitalized. No further transmission from the secondary cases was discovered.

The incubation period ranged from 7 to 20 days in affected cases (mean 12.4) when including all cases. First exposure for the wife and son could not be defined as they had multiple contacts with the primary case.

Laboratory investigation:
The results of the microbiological and serological testing are summarised in the Table. The owner of the parrot was sampled but showed no serological response to psittacosis.

Three cases provided respiratory samples that could be analysed by PCR. All the obtained _C. psittaci_ sequences were indistinguishable and clustered within genotype A.

Environmental investigation:
Unfortunately no samples could be taken from the bird feeder in the primary case's garden as it had been destroyed. _C. psittaci_ could not be detected in bird droppings from the parrot.

Control measures:
As soon as transmission of the pathogen between patients was suspected, the staff working in the ICU at the time of the incident were informed and asked to seek care should they develop symptoms. The hospital staff on the ward where the patient had initially been treated were informed on 31 Jan 2013. Instructions were given that all patients with atypical pneumonia should be treated in single ward rooms. The hospital staff were instructed to use filtering face piece (FFP3) masks during procedures with high risk of aerosol-creating procedures such as respiratory training.

Discussion and conclusion
-------------------------
The primary case in this investigation is likely to have fallen ill from contact with wild birds as one of the many sporadic cases explained by this risk factor at the time [5]. Person-to-person transmission of psittacosis is likely to be rare, but this study clearly supports the previous limited evidence that it may occur. In this outbreak we identified 3 PCR-confirmed psittacosis cases and 7 with less solid evidence of infection, i.e. serological indication only for _C. psittaci_ infection. We presume that all these 10 cases were caused by exposure to a primary case with severe disease. All fell ill within the incubation period for the disease after having been exposed to the primary case and no other likely transmission routes could be identified. There is some uncertainty regarding the son of the primary case since he was exposed both to his father during his illness and the bird feeder believed to have been the source of his father's illness. It is therefore impossible to know if he was infected by his father or directly from the bird feeder. The ICU nurse who had a boyfriend with a parrot had most likely been infected by the primary case as the parrot tested negative for the disease and the boyfriend did not have any serological response of psittacosis. Irrespective of the total number, the finding of human-to-human transmission is of significance as it shows that the Scottish incident [8] is not unique and this may have consequences for the management of psittacosis cases.

A few of the cases did not respond with high titres in the serological tests and some only with IgG [immunoglobulin G] response. We believe that this may have been because they received early treatment due to high awareness of the disease in the hospital and they were aware that they had been exposed to the primary case. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that those who had only IgG findings may have been the result of past infections. Serological diagnosis of pneumonia has its limitations. For that reason the patients have been classified into confirmed, probable and possible cases. To set an etiological diagnosis, both an acute phase serum sample and a convalescent serum sample some weeks after the acute infection is often needed unless an IgM test is positive in the acute phase. For that reason the diagnosis may be delayed. Further, cross-reacting antibodies between _C. psittaci_ and _C. pneumoniae_ have been under discussion [12]. Often a late convalescent serum can be helpful to confirm the etiology.

As we see it, there are 2 possibilities for why person-to-person transmission took place in this event. The primary case could have been especially contagious or he could have had a _C. psittaci_ strain that was especially transmissible. It is well known that strains with the same ompA gene can differ in their virulence [13]. However, as we did not detect onward transmission from the secondary cases and as the limited genetic analysis did not show any abnormalities from other strains, we believe the 1st theory. In further support of this hypothesis, although it is likely that our primary case and the other sporadic cases in Sweden at the time were infected with the same strain from a wild bird source, there were no reports of onward transmission from the other sporadic cases notified at the time in Sweden. However the contacts of the other cases may not have been followed up as closely. The genotyping of a subset of the sporadic cases believed to have been infected by wild birds between January and March 2013 showed the same type A subtype as our primary and secondary cases who were positive by PCR. All had genotype A, which is mainly associated with parrots and other psittacine birds but which has also been found in passerine birds [14]. It is the genotype causing most human cases worldwide [15]. But to completely rule out the possibility of a more pathogenic strain being the reason for the increased transmissibility in this outbreak, whole genome analysis is required. This could not be performed due to lack of an isolate.

We believe that the primary case was more contagious because he was very ill and therefore excreted more bacteria. In support of our theory of increased risk of transmission from severely ill patients, the data on incubation periods for infected cases shows a possible dose response association. Those who were highly exposed, like the nurse and the doctor who treated the primary case in the ICU, and the patient sharing a room with the case, had a shorter incubation time (7, 7 and 10 days respectively) than the cases who were only exposed to the patient while caring for him on the ward and who had an average of 15 days before symptoms started (range 11-20 days) (Figure). However, due to the low number of cases in the outbreak, more observational studies like this one are needed to show whether this is correct. Although the ICU nurse who attended at the bronchoscopy fell ill, we believe that the shorter incubation period had more to do with the patient having become more severely ill and thus being treated in ICU than the bronchoscopy procedure itself, as the doctor who fell ill was not present at the procedure and only examined the patient.

It seems probable that our preventative measures did not prevent any further transmission since all of the secondary cases were related to the primary case. He had already been transmitted to ECMO-treatment in a university hospital when the staff were informed and stricter hygienic measures regarding treatment of patients with atypical pneumonia were implemented. It is likely, however, that the measures may have shortened the duration of illness of some of the secondary cases as they are likely to have received treatment earlier than they would otherwise have done.

Public health implications
--------------------------
Our previous report of the unusual increase of psittacosis in Sweden in 2013 concluded that psittacosis is likely to be a more common disease in Sweden than previously thought, as our study suggested that it may be overlooked by clinicians and not tested for in cases of atypical pneumonia by laboratories unless specifically requested. The fact that we have now shown that nosocomial transmission may occur from seriously ill patients increases the importance of diagnosing cases of atypical pneumonia correctly, as it has implications for the management of patients with pneumonia. In order to prevent nosocomial transmission from patients with psittacosis, enhanced protection may be needed when caring for severely ill patients with atypical pneumonia, for example, using airway protection with facemasks and treating the cases in isolation. Staff and others exposed to a psittacosis patient should also be informed of the symptoms so that they seek care should they fall ill.

References
----------
1. Stewardson AJ, Grayson ML. Psittacosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2010;24(1):7-25.
2. AP, Grayson ML. Psittacosis--a review of 135 cases. Med J Aust. 1988;148(5):228-33.
3. Smith KA, Bradley KK, Stobierski MG, Tengelsen LA, National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians Psittacosis Compendium C. Compendium of measures to control _Chlamydophila psittaci_ (formerly _Chlamydia psittaci_) infection among humans (psittacosis) and pet birds, 2005. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005;226(4):532-9.
4. Smittskyddsinstitutet. Statistik for papegojsjuka 2013 [Accessed 21 Oct 2014]. Swedish. Available from: http://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/amnesomraden/statistik-och-undersokningar/sjukdomsstatistik/papegojsjuka-/
5. Rehn M, Ringberg H, Runehagen A, Herrmann B, Olsen B, Petersson AC, et al. Unusual increase of psittacosis in southern Sweden linked to wild bird exposure, January to April 2013. Euro Surveill. 2013;18(19):20478.
6. Broholm KA, Bottiger M, Jernelius H, Johansson M, Grandien M, Solver K. Ornithosis as a nosocomial infection. Scand J Infect Dis. 1977;9(4):263-7.
7. CDC. Compendium of measures to control _Chlamydia psittaci_ infection among humans (psittacosis) and pet birds (avian chlamydiosis), 1998. MMWR Recomm Rep. 1998;47(RR-10):1-14.
8. McGuigan CC, McIntyre PG, Templeton K. Psittacosis outbreak in Tayside, Scotland, December 2011 to February 2012. Euro Surveill. 2012;17(22):pii=20186.
9. Heddema ER, Beld MG, de Wever B, Langerak AA, Pannekoek Y, Duim B. Development of an internally controlled real-time PCR assay for detection of _Chlamydophila psittaci_ in the LightCycler 2.0 system. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2006;12(6):571-5.
10. Gnarpe J, Naas J, Lundback A. Comparison of a new commercial EIA kit and the microimmunofluorescence technique for the determination of IgG and IgA antibodies to _Chlamydia pneumoniae_. APMIS. 2000;108(12):819-24.
11. Ehricht R, Slickers P, Goellner S, Hotzel H, Sachse K. Optimized DNA microarray assay allows detection and genotyping of single PCR-amplifiable target copies. Mol Cell Probes. 2006;20(1):60-3.
12. Stralin K, Fredlund H, Olcen P. Labsystems enzyme immunoassay for _Chlamydia pneumoniae_ also detects _Chlamydia psittaci_ infections. J Clin Microbiol. 2001;39(9):3425-6.
13. Miyairi I, Laxton JD, Wang X, Obert CA, Arva Tatireddigari VR, van Rooijen N, et al. _Chlamydia psittaci_ genetic variants differ in virulence by modulation of host immunity. J Infect Dis. 2011;204(4):654-63.
14. Olsen B, Persson K, Broholm KA. PCR detection of _Chlamydia psittaci_ in faecal samples from passerine birds in Sweden. Epidemiol Infect. 1998;121(2):481-4.
15. Harkinezhad T, Geens T, Vanrompay D. _Chlamydophila psittaci_ infections in birds: a review with emphasis on zoonotic consequences. Vet Microbiol. 2009;135(1-2):68-77.

[byline: Wallenstein A, Fredlund H, Runehagen A]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Person-to-person transmission of this infection is quite uncommon but was reported in Tayside, Scotland and confirmed by PCR analysis (McGuigan CC, McIntyre PG, Templeton K. Psittacosis outbreak in Tayside, Scotland, December 2011-February 2012. Eurosurveillance 2012;17(22):pii=20186, http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20186). The transmission had been postulated previously but was confirmed in this Scottish cluster.

_Chlamydophila psittaci_ has been isolated from about 100 bird species, but most human _C. psittaci_ infections result from exposure to pet psittacine birds. Transmission has been documented from other birds, however, including doves, pigeons, birds of prey, and shore birds.

Psittacosis, also known as ornithosis or parrot fever, is a human disease caused by the bacterium _Chlamydophila psittaci_. Classically associated with psittacine birds such as parakeets, parrots, and cockatiels, it may affect other avian species such as turkeys, ducks, pigeons, and pheasants. Human infection in general is caused by inhalation of dust containing the bacterium, which is shed in large amounts in the feces and secretions of the infected birds. Illegally imported decorative birds that have not been screened and/or treated can be a significant source of the pathogen.

The respiratory infection, usually diagnosed serologically, can be fatal if untreated. Although most diagnosed cases have direct exposure to birds, the infection may be acquired indirectly through the aerosolization of infective material in the grass or ground such as when mowing a lawn. Because of such outbreaks, protective equipment may be recommended for individuals in areas frequented by free-ranging birds, if contact with birds and their droppings is likely when performing outdoor activities such as lawn mowing. People who are occupationally exposed to psittacosis include pet store workers, poultry farmers, poultry processing workers, and veterinarians.

Historically (http://animal-health.library4farming.org/Animal-Swine-Rabbits/DISEASES-AND-PARASITES-AFFECTING-poultry/Ornithosis-and-Psittacosis.html), the 1st description of a disease marked by an atypical pneumonia was reported in 1879 among persons having contact with sick parrots. A severe and sometimes fatal atypical pneumonia was observed in various European countries and the USA in later years. An unusually severe epidemic occurred in Paris in 1892. The name psittacosis was suggested for the disease in 1895. An epidemic involving more than 100 cases of atypical pneumonia, diagnosed as psittacosis, occurred in Argentina in 1929. A year later, outbreaks in Europe and the USA were traced to parrots newly imported from South America. - Mod.LL

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2894265,108.]
See Also
Psittacosis - Argentina: (NQ) 20140115.2172397
2013
---
Psittacosis - Sweden (03): (KR) human-to-human spread 20130725.1844496
Psittacosis - Sweden (02): wild bird 20130509.1701695
Psittacosis - Argentina: (JY) illegally sold birds 20130506.1694537
Psittacosis - Russia: (SP) 20130405.1622310
Psittacosis - Sweden: (SN, KR), alert, RFI 20130322.1599238
2012
---
Psittacosis - UK (02): (Scotland), poss. person-to-person spread 20120601.1153095
Psittacosis - United Kingdom: (Scotland) susp. 20120315.1070385
2010
---
Psittacosis, fatal - Argentina: (JY) 20100712.2329
Psittacosis, fatal - Italy: (NA) 20100427.1356
2009
---
Psittacosis - Russia: (KGN,ORE) 20090116.0185
.................................................ll/je/sh
</body>
