<header id=047319>
Published Date: 2014-06-18 14:10:15 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Obituary: Ciro de Quadros
Archive Number: 20140618.2515703
</header>
<body id=047319>
OBITUARY: CIRO DE QUADROS
*************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: 3 Jun 2014
Source: NY Times [edited]
http://webmail.earthlink.net/wam/index.jsp?x=405113965


Ciro de Quadros, 74, Dies; Leader in Ridding Latin America of Polio
------------------
Dr. Ciro de Quadros, a Brazilian epidemiologist who navigated war zones and re-imagined outmoded public health practices to lead an immunization campaign that eradicated polio in Latin America and the Caribbean, died on Wednesday [28 May 2014] in Washington. He was 74.

The cause was pancreatic cancer, said a spokesman for the Sabin Vaccine Institute in Washington, where Dr. de Quadros had been vice president emeritus since 2003.

Dr. de Quadros was relatively little known outside the loosely affiliated web of national and international health authorities that track and combat communicable diseases. But as a director of one of those groups, the Pan American Health Organization, he was widely credited with carrying out one of the boldest -- and seemingly least likely -- projects in modern epidemiological history.

Beginning in 1985, he dispatched teams of health workers in 15 countries to the most remote, underdeveloped and war-torn areas of the region to reach Latin America's most vulnerable people: unimmunized children under 5.

Mustering support was not easy. The World Health Organization's director general, Dr. Halfdan Mahler, at 1st opposed Dr. de Quadros's plan, saying it made less money available to expand primary health care in the remotest regions. But Dr. Mahler and other experts soon came to share Dr. de Quadros's view that vaccination was a starting point for delivering primary health care to children in those places.

"Medicine, sanitation, nutrition, education, all are necessary and interrelated components of preventing and curing sickness," he wrote in an article for The Huffington Post last year [2013]. "But there is one tool that stands out as the most effective: vaccines. Every child -- no matter where he or she is born -- has a fundamental right to vaccines" [The original article can be found at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ciro-de-quadros/harnessing-the-power-of-v_b_3068650.html. It beautifully sums up Ciro's beliefs and raison d'etre. - Mod.MPP].

Dr. de Quadros focused his efforts primarily on polio, but he also equipped his teams with vaccines against measles, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus and tuberculosis.

The incidence of polio had declined significantly in Latin America since the development in the early 1960s of the inexpensive Sabin vaccine, which is administered orally and costs a fraction as much per dose as the injected Salk vaccine. But Dr. de Quadros and his colleagues knew that epidemics would always be possible until the disease was tracked down and populations immunized against it.

In remote regions, his health workers organized local volunteers, drummed up publicity, enlisted the cooperation of the local health clinic's few employees and sometimes timed their mass immunizations to coincide with local religious festivals.

They negotiated 24-hour cease-fires between rebel and government forces in El Salvador and Guatemala -- so-called tranquility days -- so health workers could administer immunizations. In Peru, where they failed to win the cooperation of the Shining Path guerrillas, the teams worked around those areas controlled by the rebels, keeping the country's polio hot spots isolated and clearly defined for health workers, who would revisit them after the battle lines had shifted.

Dr. de Quadros made record keeping a hallmark of his program. Teams kept track of all families in their assigned areas and sent vaccinators to locate any child who missed an immunization appointment.

The last reported case of polio in Latin America was recorded in Pichinaki, Peru in 1991. An independent health survey commissioned by the Pan American Health Organization officially declared the disease eradicated in the region in 1994.

"It is difficult to grasp the magnitude of Ciro's achievement," said Dr. Donald A. Henderson, who led the World Health Organization's global smallpox eradication initiative in the 1960s and '70s and who was dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health from 1977 to 1990.

Dr. Henderson, who recruited the young Dr. de Quadros to help organize smallpox eradication in Ethiopia, said he was not only a great epidemiologist but also a fearless and inspirational leader.

In a phone interview on Friday, Dr. Henderson recalled Dr. de Quadros's persistence in the midst of Ethiopia's civil war as a half-dozen of his teams were kidnapped and one of his United Nations helicopters was commandeered with its pilot aboard. He helped negotiate the return of the health teams and the pilot, all of whom resumed their work in the field.

"That's a measure of the dedication he inspired," Dr. Henderson said. "Even that helicopter pilot" -- who had vaccine aboard when he was hijacked -- "vaccinated the rebels who held him."

Ciro Carlos Araujo de Quadros was born into a middle-class family in Rio Pardo, Brazil on [30 Jan 1940]. After medical school, he graduated from the National School of Public Health in Rio de Janeiro and served his 1st tour of duty as head of a government clinic in a remote Amazon area.

He worked with Dr. Henderson's WHO campaign from 1970 to 1977. From 1977 to 2002, he held a series of executive positions at the Pan American Health Organization, a subsidiary of the United Nation's WHO program.

He also taught at Johns Hopkins's schools of medicine and public health.

He is survived by his wife, Susana; 2 daughters, Julia and Cristina; and 2 stepsons, Marcelo and Alvaro Boggio.

In recent years, Dr. de Quadros led the Sabin Vaccine Institute's efforts to eradicate polio globally, as smallpox had been eradicated in the 1960s and '70s and as polio was in Latin America 2 decades later.

Getting rid of polio would mean more than "eradicating one disease," he wrote in his Huffington Post article. It would signal a global commitment to delivering vital vaccines and health programs to all of the world's children. "Now is the time," he added, "to harness the power of vaccines to end polio for good."

[Byline: Paul Vitello]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: 30 May 2014
Source: Huffington Post [edited]
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-orin-levine/remembering-ciro-de-quadr_b_5417608.html


Remembering Ciro de Quadros, Global Health Hero
-----------------------
The world of public health and vaccines got a little dimmer on Wednesday [28 May 2014] when one of our leading lights, Dr. Ciro de Quadros, passed away at the age of 74.

In describing Dr. Ciro de Quadros, I could list the dozens of awards and accolades he received for his groundbreaking contributions to the field of public health. I could talk about his personal charm, sense of humor, fiery belief in his principles, or the energy that kept him working well into his 70s.

The most important thing to know about Ciro is that he was a tireless champion for children, and his efforts have saved countless lives and spared millions from unnecessary suffering. He was also a wonderful mentor and friend to many in the field of global health.

Our personal lives have been intertwined since the 1970s, but our professional lives only came together in the past 20 years. Ciro and my father, Dr. Myron Levine, became close through their work as "smallpox warriors" in the 1970s, my father in Bangladesh and Ciro in Ethiopia as the World Health Organization's Chief Epidemiologist for Smallpox Eradication. On [31 Oct 1977], the world's last case of endemic smallpox was diagnosed and contained in Somalia. It was a groundbreaking achievement in which Ciro, who led the World Health Organization's program in neighboring Ethiopia, played a pivotal role.

With smallpox eradication achieved, Ciro returned home to join the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). By 1981, he set his sights on eradicating polio in the Americas, another goal considered unrealistic by his colleagues. A testament to his drive and passion, Ciro strategically orchestrated immunization efforts in spite of civil wars and armed conflict in Colombia, El Salvador, Peru and other countries, and by 1991, Peru reported the last confirmed case of wild polio in the Americas.

In typical Ciro de Quadros style, he was still unsatisfied, still eager to aim higher and achieve more. So, after smallpox and polio, Ciro next applied his expertise and passion to stopping the transmission of measles (in 2002), and then rubella (in 2009) in the Americas. In his later work in immunization financing and increasing vaccination against pneumonia, rotavirus, typhoid and neglected tropical diseases, Ciro reinforced the value of clear objectives and collective buy-in, but underscored the importance of flexibility in translating approaches to different countries and different diseases.

Although I knew Ciro a long time -- believe it or not, he was at my Bar Mitzvah in 1980 -- our professional relationship got off to an uneven start. In the mid-1990s, I was working as a CDC epidemiologist and trying to get Hib vaccine introduced into developing countries in Latin America (and elsewhere) by advancing an agenda that included using fractional doses of Hib, essentially buying a single dose vial and then using it to vaccinate 2 or more kids by splitting the dose into 2 or more smaller doses.

Ciro, who was head of vaccines for PAHO, heard about the work and summoned me into his office to find out why I was making this fuss in his region about off-label vaccine use. The meeting left an indelible memory. Ciro maintained that this was off-label use and shouldn't be promulgated.

I asked him, had he ever bucked the establishment or bent the rules to meet a public health objective when he was young? (In fairness, I knew he was a bit of a maverick in his younger years). He responded by telling me that he was going to solve the Hib introduction problem in PAHO on his own (he did), and that the studies we were doing weren't needed (they ultimately weren't). But at the same time, with a wry smile and a wink, he also let me know that while he needed to take the official position now, he remembered being a young rule-breaker himself and wasn't really all that mad about it. I left feeling both frustrated by his official position and feeling like we had connected on a certain level.

By 2006, Ciro was Executive Vice President of the Sabin Vaccine Institute, and he invited me to co-chair the Pneumococcal Awareness Council of Experts (PACE). Through our work to improve uptake of pneumococcal vaccines in country after country around the world, Ciro taught me a great deal and became a valued mentor and friend. Above all, he taught me to have high expectations for my team and higher expectations for myself. He was a leader by example. Most importantly, to me, he exemplified what can be accomplished through the determination of a single, visionary individual.

When Ciro was asked to say a few words to commemorate the 30th anniversary of smallpox eradication, he said: "My experience with smallpox eradication changed my life entirely." He went on to explain how it helped him appreciate the power of public health and the tools we use to achieve it.

But in reality it was Ciro who changed so many lives. His experience with smallpox eradication and the dedication, expertise and drive he brought to everything he did for global health in the years that followed entirely changed the lives of millions of others as well.

Ciro de Quadros showed us all that the world's biggest, most ambitious and most challenging problems are the ones that are most worth solving, and the ones that will leave the most important legacy. And on an individual level, as a mentor and a friend, he changed the lives of many people in public health and vaccines, including mine. For that, I and many others will always cherish his memory.

[Written by: Dr. Orin Levine, Director of Vaccine Delivery, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: accessed 18 Jun 2014
Source: PAHO [edited]
http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=9658%3Aciro-de-quadros-public-health-hero-of-the-americas-1940-2014&catid=1443%3Anews-front-page-items&Itemid=2&lang=en


Ciro de Quadros, Public Health Hero of the Americas (1940-2014)
--------------
PAHO marks with great sadness the passing of Dr. Ciro de Quadros, a pioneering public health leader who played a pivotal role in polio eradication in the Americas and in strengthening immunization programs throughout the Western Hemisphere and beyond.

He died peacefully at home on 28 May 2014 in Washington, D.C., surrounded by his family. He was 74.

Just 5 weeks earlier, on [25 Apr 2014], Dr. de Quadros had been named a Public Health Hero of the Americas in recognition of his extraordinary public health leadership. "This is PAHO's highest distinction," said PAHO/WHO Director Carissa F. Etienne in presenting the award. "There is no one who deserves it more than our much-respected and much-loved colleague, Ciro. We at PAHO believe that no single person has done more to extend the benefits of immunization to people throughout the Americas."

Dr. de Quadros's career coincided with and helped to accelerate the growing use of vaccines to save lives and eliminate diseases in the Americas and worldwide. He was a dedicated and rigorous practitioner of public health from his very 1st professional post -- as chief medical officer in a remote town in the Brazilian Amazon -- to his work on smallpox eradication in Brazil and Ethiopia and his immunization leadership at PAHO and later the Sabin Vaccine Institute.

"We feel great sorrow but also the deepest appreciation for his amazing and tireless commitment to the health of the peoples of the world, especially those children of the most vulnerable and underserved communities in the Americas and around the world," said PAHO Deputy Director Jon K. Andrus.

In the late 1970s, Dr. de Quadros founded the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) at PAHO, which helped countries of Latin America and the Caribbean provide vaccines to their populations that had previously been available only in wealthier countries.

In the early 1980s, he began advocating for the eradication of polio from the Americas, and in the next few years successfully mobilized support from other immunization experts, organizations and health authorities in PAHO Member States. "Many were skeptical, but you brought them along by the sheer force of your conviction and your proven competence," Dr. Etienne told him at the 25 Apr 2014 award presentation.

Dr. de Quadros also spearheaded the creation of the PAHO Revolving Fund for Vaccine Procurement, established in 1979 to allow countries to pool demand for vaccines and other supplies, achieving economies of scale and lower prices. He also instituted other practices that have since become institutionalized at PAHO and in regional public health action more generally, including horizontal (country-to-country) collaboration, rigorous evaluation, the use of technical advisory groups for peer discussion and review, and regular progress reports on regional strategies adopted by the PAHO Directing Council.

Dr. de Quadros's "leadership truly set the stage for PAHO's continued strength in immunization and, more importantly, for our region's success in maintaining immunization coverage rates that are the envy of other regions of the world," said Dr. Etienne.

"Ciro had vision, persistence, intellectual rigor and courage that were unequaled among his peers," said PAHO Deputy Director Andrus. "He was a role model for all of us, and he will be greatly missed."

At the time of his death, Dr. de Quadros was Executive Vice President of the Sabin Vaccine Institute, where for more than a decade he led advocacy efforts that encouraged low- and middle-income countries to prioritize and sustain financing for vaccine programs.

He was instrumental in developing and advancing the Global Vaccine Action Plan, a framework to prevent millions of deaths by 2020 through more equitable access to existing vaccines for people in all communities. The plan was endorsed by the 194 Member States of the World Health Assembly in May 2012.

When that endorsement was made, Dr. de Quadros, then co-chair of the Decade of Vaccines Collaboration's Steering Committee, which elaborated the plan, said, "While immunization already prevents millions of deaths and uncounted illness, we cannot rest until life-saving, cost-effective vaccine technology reaches people in every community and every country through this global plan."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[I had the good fortune to have worked for Ciro during the '80s in the acceleration stages of the Expanded Programme on Immunizations and on helping develop the Plans of Action for polio eradication and measles elimination in the Americas. His drive and passion for his mission was infectious to all who came into contact with him, myself included. There are many anecdotes one can add to point out Ciro's passion for his work, and the steps he would take to guarantee success. To guarantee the success of childhood vaccination programs in the Americas, an early goal of Ciro's was to ensure that all governments had line items in their budgets for the purchase of vaccines. When other donor agencies came to work on vaccination activities in the region and generously offered to buy vaccines for the countries, he stood firm on insisting that should not occur, as he saw the importance of governmental buy-in for these initiatives (both literally and figuratively). He believed that polio could be eradicated, and through his guidance and persistence, it was eradicated in the Americas, with the last case of locally acquired wild poliovirus infection in the Americas occurring in 1991 in Peru. That set the stage for global polio eradication efforts. Following the successes in polio eradication in the region, he applied the same energy and focus on measles elimination in the region, and similarly succeeded in interrupting transmission by 2002. On the personal side, he was a warm and caring person, and welcomed you to his home with open arms. All visits to Ciro's home town included invitations to his home, and spending time with both he and his family. He will be sorely missed by all who knew him, and his legacy of impacting child survival will continue. - Mod.MPP]

.................................................mpp/msp
</body>
