<header id=057255>
Published Date: 2017-02-10 08:57:31 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Leptospirosis - USA: (AZ) canine
Archive Number: 20170210.4829177
</header>
<body id=057255>
LEPTOSPIROSIS - USA: (ARIZONA) CANINE
*************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 9 Feb 2017 12:00 AM MST
Source: The Fountain Hills Times [edited]
http://www.fhtimes.com/news/local_news/adog-warns-of-outbreak/article_99cc0bf6-ed76-11e6-9b6a-8f2ac353a6d2.html


The Association of Dog Owners' Group (ADOG) in Fountain Hills [Maricopa County] has notified its members it has recently become aware that 4 dogs in the community have been diagnosed with canine leptospirosis.

The email notification states, "These confirmed cases, and possibly others, are of great concern to the welfare of our entire canine community and possibly ourselves.

"Leptospirosis is a serious disease that affects dogs, cats, horses, swine, deer, and other mammals, including humans. Signs of leptospirosis vary greatly from mild malaise to death. The incubation period is usually 7 days."

The most common signs for dogs in the early phase are fever, shivering, lethargy, decreased appetite, and muscle tenderness. As the disease progresses, increased thirst and urination, abdominal pain, vomiting, eye disease, diarrhea, joint stiffness, bruising of the skin, coughing, and a runny nose are just a few of the symptoms that can occur.

Diagnosis of leptospirosis requires special testing to identify the organism; routine blood work, urinalysis, and clotting tests will make it a rule-out but not make the diagnosis.

Of the 4 confirmed cases in Fountain Hills, all of the dogs lived in close proximity on the same block in town. This could be the point of contact. Often the disease is found in clusters. One of the dogs frequented the dog park in town.

There is a treatment, and all of the dogs are currently under a veterinarian's care, but some action is still needed. Since the disease is transmitted through the passing of bodily fluids including saliva and urine, ADOG is taking the precaution of removing all of the water buckets and tennis balls from the dog park for the time being. The water hoses will still be functional, but owners will need to bring a drinking vessel so that their dogs can stay hydrated.

Also, tennis balls or Frisbees or any other type of toy should be left at home since dogs like to play with each other's toys.

"We don't want to provide any convenient means for the disease to spread in the park," said Bill Hindman, ADOG vice president. "We will continue to monitor the situation and will advise you as we learn more. Hopefully these cases will be the only ones and there will be no further problems. However, we recommend you contact your vet and get the vaccination as a precaution."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[It is great to see this group encourage people to get their pets to the veterinarian for vaccination. Vaccination can stem the tide of this disease. It is also great to see them being pro-active at the dog park, by removing water bowls because of the risk of transmission through saliva.

Dogs are the maintenance host for _Leptospira interrogans_ serovar Canicola, and before widespread vaccination programs, serovars Canicola and Icterohaemorrhagiae were the most common serovars in dogs in the USA. The prevalence of canine serovars has shifted significantly in the last 20 years; currently the most prevalent serovars are believed to be Grippotyphosa, Pomona, and Bratislava; however, this belief is largely based on serologic results that are now known to be inaccurate in predicting the infecting serovar in dogs with leptospirosis. The serovars that cause disease in dogs are likely to vary with geographic region and the presence of reservoir hosts. Unfortunately, current understanding of the serovars that cause natural disease in dogs is limited by the fact that isolation of leptospires is rarely performed; thus, studies to date have relied on serologic data. It is now accepted that the results of the MAT [microscopic agglutination test] do not reliably predict the infecting serovar in dogs (or people) with leptospirosis; thus, the true infecting serovar is unknown in most cases. However, it is likely that the serovars that cause disease in dogs are those circulating in local wildlife. Experimental infections and isolation of organisms from a small number of sick dogs have shown that serovars Icterohaemorrhagiae, Canicola, Autumnalis, Pomona, Bratislava, Sejroe, and Ballum are capable of causing disease in dogs. Knowledge of the infecting serovar in dogs is essential for epidemiologic studies and vaccine development; it is less important for clinicians managing individual cases. It is currently not known whether specific serovars are associated with specific clinical signs in dogs, and there is no published evidence to guide therapy based on serovar identification. It is, however, extremely important for veterinarians to maintain a high index of suspicion for leptospirosis, because this is a zoonotic disease and has a wide range of clinical presentations in dogs. Any age, breed, or sex of dog is susceptible to leptospirosis, and the diagnosis should not be excluded on the basis of signalment or lifestyle. Canine leptospirosis is not restricted to large-breed dogs, male dogs, or dogs with a predominantly outdoor lifestyle.

Acute kidney injury has been the most common presentation for canine leptospirosis in recent years. Affected dogs may present with lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, abdominal pain, and history of polyuria, oliguria, or anuria. Dogs that survive acute renal failure may return to baseline or progress to chronic kidney disease. Leptospirosis should also be considered in any dog with previously diagnosed chronic kidney disease that develops "acute-on-chronic" kidney injury. Renal tubular damage in leptospirosis may manifest as cylindruria, proteinuria, or glycosuria. In people, acute kidney injury due to leptospirosis is often nonoliguric and can be associated with hyponatremia and hypokalemia. These electrolyte changes have also been noted in canine leptospirosis, along with the expected changes of azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, and acidosis of renal failure. Hyperkalemia is also possible. Polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD) in the absence of azotemia is a less common manifestation of the renal effects of leptospirosis. PU/PD may be due to a decrease in glomerular filtration rate that is sufficient to cause loss of renal concentrating ability without azotemia. However, PU/PD can also be due to nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.

Acute liver disease may accompany acute renal failure in dogs with leptospirosis, or it may occur alone. Affected dogs may be icteric, and serum biochemistry analysis reveals increased bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase. ALT [alanine aminotransferase] is typically less markedly increased than alkaline phosphatase. In people and dogs, the jaundice of acute leptospirosis appears to be associated with minimal histopathologic changes in the liver, suggesting that it is due to the "cholestasis of sepsis" rather than to hepatocellular damage.

Muscle pain, stiffness, weakness, trembling, or reluctance to move can be seen in dogs with leptospirosis. These may be the result of vasculitis, myositis, or nephritis. Myalgia is commonly reported in human leptospirosis and is associated with the septicemic phase of the disease.

Less common manifestations of canine leptospirosis include bleeding disorders characterized by petechial hemorrhages, epistaxis, melena, and hematemesis. These findings are most likely due to vasculitis. Affected dogs may also be thrombocytopenic; however, platelet counts are rarely low enough to be responsible for spontaneous bleeding. The causes and mechanisms of bleeding disorders in leptospirosis are poorly understood, but they have been suggested to be associated with endothelial cell damage. Pulmonary hemorrhage is now one of the most common clinical signs in outbreaks of human leptospirosis. This is a less common finding in canine leptospirosis; however, cough or dyspnea, or radiographic abnormalities have been noted in a number of affected dogs. Uveitis is an uncommon manifestation of leptospirosis in dogs. It appears to be infrequently associated with experimental canine leptospirosis, but rare case reports exist. Additional clinical signs reported in dogs with leptospirosis include vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, fever, hypothermia, oculonasal discharge, lymphadenopathy, effusions, and edema.

CBC [complete blood count] changes may include neutrophilia, lymphopenia, monocytosis, and mild anemia. These changes are nonspecific; however, mild to moderate thrombocytopenia is seen in more than 50 percent of cases and, if detected in combination with azotemia or evidence of cholestasis, should prompt diagnostic testing for leptospirosis. Coagulation abnormalities may include increased fibrin degradation products and prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). Urinalysis may reveal hyposthenuria, isosthenuria, or hypersthenuria, depending on the degree of renal involvement. Other changes may include proteinuria, glucosuria, cylindruria, hematuria, and pyuria. Leptospirosis could also potentially be associated with renal tubular acidosis.

Reticulonodular pulmonary opacities have been described in the thoracic radiographs of dogs with leptospirosis and attributed to pulmonary hemorrhage. These changes may be diffuse or predominantly involve the caudodorsal lung fields. Abdominal radiographs may be unremarkable or may show renomegaly or hepatomegaly. Changes noted on ultrasonography include renomegaly, pyelectasia, increased cortical echogenicity, perinephric effusion, and a hyperechoic medullary band. However, these changes are not specific for leptospirosis, and absence of these findings does not exclude the diagnosis.

Gross necropsy findings can include jaundice, effusions, and petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhages on any organ, pleural, or peritoneal surface. The kidneys and liver may be enlarged, and lungs may be wet, heavy, and discolored. The liver is often friable with an accentuated lobular pattern and may have a yellowish brown discoloration. The kidneys may have white foci on the subcapsular surface. Microscopic findings in the liver may include mild random hepatocytic necrosis, nonsuppurative hepatitis, and intrahepatic bile stasis, while swollen tubular epithelial cells, tubular necrosis, and a mixed inflammatory reaction may be seen in the kidneys.

Ideally, a combination of serology and organism detection should be used for diagnosis of canine leptospirosis. Serology is the most frequently used diagnostic test for dogs. Acute and convalescent titers may be necessary to confirm a diagnosis; hence, the use of the MAT is preferred over the ELISA. PCR-based tests are widely available, and collection of both blood and urine samples before administration of antibiotics should be considered for maximal sensitivity. The results of all diagnostic tests should be interpreted in light of the animal's vaccination history, clinical signs, and clinicopathologic findings.

Renal failure and liver disease are treated with fluid therapy and other supportive measures to maintain normal fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance. Supportive measures may include antiemetics, GI protectants, phosphate binders, and hepatic support medications. Renal replacement therapy with intermittent hemodialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy should be considered for dogs that are anuric or oliguric despite appropriate supportive therapy. Antibiotic therapy is indicated whenever leptospirosis is suspected and should be instituted before confirmatory test results are available. There are no experimental studies in dogs to guide selection of antibiotic protocols for this species. Current recommendations are to treat with doxycycline (5 mg/kg/day, IV or PO) for 2 weeks. For dogs that cannot tolerate doxycycline, initial therapy with a penicillin is appropriate, but this should be followed by a 2-week course of doxycycline to eliminate the renal carrier phase of infection. Dogs recently exposed to leptospirosis may be treated prophylactically with oral doxycycline for 14 days.

Commercial bacterins for dogs are available for serovars Canicola, Icterohaemorrhagiae, Grippotyphosa, and Pomona. Vaccinated dogs may potentially be susceptible to infection with other serovars, although this has not been tested in an experimental setting. In general, currently available vaccines provide good protection from clinical disease and also appear to reduce renal colonization and urine shedding. Concerns exist regarding hypersensitivity reactions after leptospiral vaccination in dogs, but these appear to be unjustified based on more recent studies and perhaps associated with the use of more highly purified vaccines. Canine challenge studies have demonstrated duration of immunity of at least 1 year; thus, prior recommendations for vaccinating every 6 months are no longer justified.

Because leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease, all veterinary personnel should take appropriate precautions when handling known or suspected infected animals. Such dogs do not need to be placed in isolation but should be nursed with barrier precautions, paying particular attention to avoiding exposure of skin or mucous membranes to urine or blood. Infected dogs should be allowed to urinate in designated areas that can subsequently be cleaned and disinfected. The organisms are killed by all commonly used disinfectants. Owners of dogs recently diagnosed with leptospirosis should be advised of the zoonotic nature of the disease and contact their physicians with any health concerns. Owners should wear gloves when cleaning up urine and should wash their hands after handling the dog, at least until the course of antibiotic therapy is completed.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.merckvetmanual.com/generalized-conditions/leptospirosis/leptospirosis-in-dogs. - Mod.TG

The state of Arizona can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4829177,1411. Maricopa County can be seen on the map at http://geology.com/county-map/arizona-county-map.gif. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
2016
----
Leptospirosis - USA: (IL) canine 20160924.4513345
2014
----
Leptospirosis, canine - USA (02): (FL) 20140405.2382487
Leptospirosis, canine - USA: (FL) 20140316.2335752
2011
----
Leptospirosis, canine - USA (MI) 20111029.3218
2010
----
Leptospirosis, canine - USA: (OH) 20101021.3806
2008
----
Leptospirosis, sea mammals - USA: (CA) 20081003.3125
2004
----
Leptospirosis, sea mammals - USA (Pacific Northwest) (02) 20041214.3305
Leptospirosis, sea mammals - USA (Pacific Northwest) 20041017.2821
Leptospirosis, sea lions - USA (CA) 20040926.2659
Leptospirosis, human, canine - USA (TX) (03) 20040911.2527
Leptospirosis, human, canine - USA (TX) (02) 20040907.2499
Leptospirosis, human, canine - USA (TX) 20040904.2472
Leptospirosis, fatal - USA (AS) 20040820.2307
Leptospirosis, canine - USA (IL) 20040720.1968
Leptospirosis, fatal - USA: background 20040413.1007
Leptospirosis, fatal - USA (HI) 20040411.0987
Leptospirosis, canine - USA (CA) 20040406.0938
.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
