Disease outbreak news

5 February 2014 - On 4 February 2014, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of eight additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus, including two deaths. .

Details of the cases are as follows

Six of the cases are male. The age range is 4 to 84 years old. Cases were reported from Zhejiang (4), Guangdong (3) and Jiangsu (1). Three cases are currently in a critical condition, two cases are currently in a severe condition and one is currently in a mild condition. All cases are reported to have had a history of exposure to poultry or a live poultry market.

A 42 year-old man from Hangzhou City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 25 January and was admitted to hospital on 30 January. He is currently in a severe condition. The patient has a history of exposure to poultry.
An 84 year-old man from Hangzhou City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 24 January and was admitted to hospital on 28 January. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has a history of exposure to poultry.
A 56 year-old man from Jinhua City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 24 January and was admitted to hospital on 1 February. He is currently in a severe condition. The patient has a history of exposure to a live poultry market.
A 51 year-old man from Shaoxing City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 27 January and was admitted on 1 February. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has history of exposure to a live poultry market.
A 4 year-old girl from Zhaoqing City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 26 January and was admitted to hospital on 3 February. She is currently in a mild condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
A 76 year-old man from Yangjiang City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 27 January and was admitted to hospital on 1 February. He died on 3 February. The patient had a history of exposure to live poultry.
A 52 year-old man from Huizhou City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 25 January and was admitted to hospital on 2 February. He died on 3 February. The patient had a history of exposure to live poultry.
A 59 year-old woman from Wuxi City, Jiangsu Province, who became ill on 26 January and was admitted to hospital on 29 January. She is currently in a critical condition. The patient has history of exposure to a live poultry market.

So far, there is no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.

The Chinese Government continues to take the following surveillance and control measures:

strengthen surveillance and situation analysis;
reinforce case management and treatment;
conduct risk communication with the public and release information;
strengthen international collaboration and communication; and
conduct scientific studies.
Sporadic human cases

While the recent report of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus being detected in live poultry imported from the mainland to Hong Kong SAR, shows the potential for the virus to spread through live poultry, at this time there is no indication that international spread of avian influenza A(H7N9) has occurred through humans or animals.

Further sporadic human cases of A(H7N9) infection are expected in affected and possibly neighbouring areas, especially given expected increases in the trade and transport of poultry associated with the Lunar New Year.

WHO advice

WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, or contact with animals in live bird markets, or entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions.

As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.

WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.

Current technical information as well as guidance related to avian influenza A(H7N9) can be found at the WHO web site:
Avian influenza A(H7N9) virus
Human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruspdf, 194kb
21 January 2014
Avian influenza in humans
Reducing risk of exposure to pathogens during slaughter and preparation of food
