<header id=058184>
Published Date: 2019-04-27 10:08:39 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Raw pet food diets - USA: warning
Archive Number: 20190427.6443759
</header>
<body id=058184>
RAW PET FOOD DIETS - USA: WARNING
*********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 24 Apr 2019
Source: WKYT [edited]
https://www.wkyt.com/content/news/Raw-Pet-Food-Veterinarians-warn-about-trendy-diet-for-dogs-and-cats-509016631.html


The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have recommended not feeding dogs and cats a raw diet, meaning meat that is not cooked to a proper temperature. However, it's a trend that's growing.

It's referred to as fresh dog and cat food, and it's lining pet store aisles. It means the dog and cat food is either raw or barely cooked meat and vegetables.

"What it is it's going back to nature so it's biologically appropriate," explained Amy Johnson with Feeders Supply Stores. "Wolves would not find a dry food, wolves would not find a canned food. But they do find meat and their teeth are made to shred meat and so that's what we need to be feeding them."

Johnson went on to explain entirely raw meat is not good. It's missing a lot of vitamins dogs and cats need. The meat her store sells has been cooked to a specific temperature to avoid all the bacteria.

But many dog and cat owners are going completely raw, and that's causing trouble for local veterinarians like Dr. Kristin Quicksall with Brighton Animal Clinic. "We've had pets that have passed away from _Salmonella_. Extreme diarrhea, extreme (gastrointestinal illnesses). So I would deter them away from the raw diet," Quicksall said.

When owners ask about a raw food diet, Dr. Quicksall said she talks to the owner about the aspects of preparing the food, how it could be contaminated and it's very messy.

Preparation for raw diets can also cause owners to get sick from _Salmonella_. "The only thing we have to keep in mind is the raw diets have a lot of bacteria in them, and these bacteria are something that's zoonotic, meaning the owner can also get the bacteria," Quicksall explained.

Distributors have caught on to the raw food trend and found a way to make it safer and much less messy. It is also pricey; however, Johnson said a little bit can go a long way because almost all of it is digested by the dog or cat. "You have a little bit of increased cost but you do have the fact to be a little bit safer of bacteria content and balance of the content," she said.

[Byline: Miranda Combs]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Veterinarians are increasingly seeing vitamin and mineral deficiencies and bacterial diseases related to raw meat and even grain-free diets. Some of the animal caretakers have suffered bacterial infection from preparation of the food. The sensitivity to it being raw tends to decrease, as do some safety precautions, when one has prepared it on a regular basis. While the safety precautions should be the same as when one prepares food for humans, it sadly becomes more lax over time.

Domesticated dogs have evolved for their environment in much the same way wild dogs evolved for their environment. There are differences between them at this point in time. The 1st part of a killed animal the wolf or other wild carnivores consume is the intestines and liver because of the vitamins and minerals of grasses the herbivore has consumed.

On this same topic, the FDA performed a 2-year study regarding raw meat, health and dangers to dogs, which was published by the FDA and Hills Pet Food; large portions of the summary are posted here:

"It's a fairly common belief because dogs are descended from wolves, they should eat a diet similar to that of their wild ancestors. Because wolves are carnivores -- meaning that they solely eat meat -- it's often assumed that dogs should also be fed a carnivorous diet.

"The problem with this assumption is that dogs are genetically different from wolves, says Science Magazine. Dogs split off from wolves and became domesticated thousands of years ago. Since then, they have evolved alongside humans to be able to eat much of what humans eat. In a study published in Nature, genetic researchers found clear evidence that dogs have genetically adapted to eat a diet consisting of meats and starches. Feeding your dog nothing but raw meat as though he's a tame wolf has the potential to deprive him of vitamins and nutrients that are vital to his health. Such a diet could pose serious health risks not only to dogs, but also to people.

"A 2-year study conducted by the US Food and Drug Administration from 2010 to 2012 found that raw pet food is more likely than other types of pet food to carry bacteria, including _Salmonella_ and _Listeria monocytogenes_, that cause food-borne illnesses. This study prompted the FDA to issue a warning about the public health risks of raw pet food diets. Not only that, but veterinary organizations, like the American Animal Hospital Association, officially recommend against feeding raw meat-based diets to dogs, as does the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA).

"While it's possible that your dog could get food poisoning from eating raw meat infected by _Salmonella_, _Escherichia coli_, or other disease-causing bacteria, it's more likely that your dog could himself become a carrier, says The Whole Dog Journal. A dog's stomach acid may neutralize infectious bacteria before they make him sick, but there's a chance he could still pass the bacteria to other dogs or people he comes into contact with. What's even more troubling is that a 2011 study in The Canadian Veterinary Journal found that much of the _Salmonella_ found in dogs fed raw meat diets was a type that's resistant to antibiotic drugs.

"Another worry of raw diets is obstruction from any bones or other solid artifacts that are not properly removed from the food. These can cause choking or intestinal damage to your pup. Finally, raw diets are not properly balanced to provide your dog with the adequate levels of calcium, phosphorus and vitamin D that are essential to a growing dog's development. For instance, without the right amount of calcium, your puppy could develop skeletal problems.

"Of course, another important criticism of raw diets for dogs is the lack of balanced nutrition. For healthy dogs that aren't dealing with health problems that require a specialized diet, the American Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals recommends feeding a diet with the right balance of protein, water, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals. High-quality dog foods are formulated specifically to meet these needs in the correct amounts. What's more, a dog's nutritional needs change as he goes through different life stages. Dog foods are typically specifically suited to each stage of your pet's development.

"Proponents of raw food diets claim that their dogs' skin and coats showed improvements after switching to raw meat diets; however, it's possible that any previous skin problems occurred from low-quality pet food, an environmental factor no longer around, or negative reactions to an ingredient in one brand of dog food. Instead, switching their dogs to a high-quality dog food may lead to similar improvements while ensuring that their dogs receive the proper balance of nutrients.

"In spite of the risks and the lack of scientific evidence supporting the health benefits of a raw food diet, many people still insist a raw diet is the healthiest way to feed their dogs. If you're not convinced that raw diets for dogs should be avoided, here are some safety guidelines recommended by the FDA to help reduce the risk of contamination to you and your dog:

- Avoid touching your face or mouth while handling raw pet food.
- Thoroughly wash your hands with soap and water after handling raw meat.
- Clean and disinfect all surfaces, utensils and other objects that came into contact with the raw pet food. The FDA recommends washing the surface with soap and water and then following with a solution of one tablespoon of bleach to one quart of water.
- Freeze raw meat or poultry until you're ready to use them (freezing does not guarantee killing of all the bacteria. _Salmonella_ and _E. coli_ can often be resistant to cold temperatures). Thaw raw meat in your refrigerator or microwave, not in the sink or on the countertop.
- Carefully handle raw meat or poultry to avoid spreading raw juices to other areas.
- If your pet doesn't finish its food, immediately refrigerate or carefully dispose of the leftovers.
- Avoid kissing your dog on or near its mouth, and don't allow dogs to lick your face.
- Be sure to wash your face and hands after handling or being licked by your dog.

"It's also a good idea to wear disposable gloves while handling your dog's food and to use disposable plates. Because young children and the elderly are especially susceptible to foodborne illnesses, they should never come into contact with this type of dog food.

"Your pet's stool is also a potential source of contamination. Be sure to collect and safely dispose of your dog's stool, taking care not to come into contact with it. Thoroughly wash your hands with soap and water when you're done.

"With this evidence in hand, you can confidently answer 'No' the next time you hear the question 'Should I feed my dog a raw diet?' While the enthusiasm of raw diet proponents can be alluring, the safety of your dog and the people in your household should be your highest priority. If you're still not sure, talk to your veterinarian about the best type of food to feed your dog."

Portions of this comment extracted from https://www.hillspet.com/dog-care/nutrition-feeding/dangers-of-raw-diets-for-dogs. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6443759,106]

.................................................sb/tg/rd/ml
</body>
