<header id=055783>
Published Date: 2016-04-27 16:58:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Scrapie, sheep - USA: (TX)
Archive Number: 20160427.4185993
</header>
<body id=055783>
SCRAPIE, SHEEP - USA: (TEXAS)
*****************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 22 Apr 2016
Source: Texas Animal Health Commission [edited]
http://www.tahc.texas.gov/news/pr/2016/2016-04-22_TAHCScrapie.pdf

Texas Animal Health Commission (TAHC) officials have confirmed scrapie in a Hartley County ewe. The ewe was tested by TAHC after the owner reported signs of weight loss and lack of coordination to their local veterinarian.

The premises were quarantined and a flock plan for monitoring is being developed by the TAHC and USDA. "The TAHC is working closely with the flock owner, sharing all of the options for disease eradication," said Dr. David Finch, TAHC Region 1 Director. "We are thankful the producer was proactive in identifying a problem and seeking veterinary help immediately."

Texas leads the nation in sheep and goat production. Since 2008, there have been no confirmed cases of scrapie in Texas. The last big spike in Texas scrapie cases was in 2006 when 9 infected herds were identified and the last herd was released from restrictions in 2013. According to USDA regulations, Texas must conduct adequate scrapie surveillance by collecting a minimum of 598 sheep samples annually. Since USDA slaughter surveillance started in FY 2003, the percent of cull sheep found positive for scrapie at slaughter (once adjusted for face color) has decreased 90 percent.

Scrapie is the oldest known transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, and under natural conditions only sheep and goats are known to be affected by scrapie. It is a fatal disease that affects the central nervous system of sheep and goats. It is not completely understood how scrapie is passed from one animal to the next and apparently healthy sheep infected with scrapie can spread the disease.

Sheep and goats are typically infected as young lambs or kids, though adult sheep and goats can become infected. The most effective method of scrapie prevention is to maintain a closed flock. Raising replacement ewes, purchasing genetically resistant rams and ewes, or buying from a certified-free scrapie flock are other options to reduce the risk of scrapie.

At this time the resistant genetic markers in goats have not been identified, therefore it is important to maintain your sheep and goat herds separately. The incubation period for Scrapie is typically 2 to 5 years.

Producers should record individual identification numbers and the seller's premise identification number on purchase and sales records. These records must be maintained for a minimum of 5 years. Producers should notify the Texas Animal Health Commission (800-550-8242) or the USDA-Austin Office (512-383-2400) if they have an adult sheep or goat with neurologic signs such as incoordination, behavioral changes, or intense itching with wool loss. Producers may order scrapie identification tags by calling 866-873-2824.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Joseph Dudley

[This is the first scrapie case in Texas in 8 years. That is a testament to the commitment to healthy animals and a program that is working.

Scrapie is a fatal, degenerative disease affecting the central nervous system of sheep and goats. It is among a number of diseases classified as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE). Infected flocks that contain a high percentage of susceptible animals can experience significant production losses. Over a period of several years the number of infected animals increases, and the age at onset of clinical signs decreases making these flocks economically unviable. Female animals sold from infected flocks spread scrapie to other flocks. The presence of scrapie in the United States also prevents the export of breeding stock, semen, and embryos to many other countries.

The agent responsible for scrapie and other TSEs is smaller than the smallest known virus and has not been completely characterized. There are 3 main theories on the nature of the scrapie agent: (1) the agent is a prion, which is an abnormal form of a normal cellular protein, (2) the agent is a virus with unusual characteristics, and (3) the agent is a virino, a very small piece of DNA that acts like a virus. The scrapie agent is extremely resistant to heat and to normal sterilization processes. It does not evoke any detectable immune response or inflammatory reaction in sheep and goats

The scrapie agent is thought to be spread most commonly from the ewe to her offspring and to other lambs through contact with the placenta and placental fluids. Signs or effects of the disease usually appear 2 to 5 years after the animal is infected but may not appear until much later. Sheep may live 1 to 6 months or longer after the onset of clinical signs, but death is inevitable. The genetics of the sheep affects their susceptibility to scrapie.

In the laboratory, the scrapie agent has been transmitted to hamsters, mice, rats, voles, gerbils, mink, cattle, and some species of monkeys by inoculation. There is no scientific evidence to indicate that scrapie poses a risk to human health. There is no epidemiologic evidence that scrapie of sheep and goats is transmitted to humans, such as through contact on the farm, at slaughter plants, or butcher shops.

Signs of scrapie vary widely among individual animals and develop very slowly. Due to damage to nerve cells, affected animals usually show behavioral changes, tremor (especially of head and neck), rubbing, and locomotor incoordination that progresses to recumbence and death.

Early signs include subtle changes in behavior or temperament. These changes may be followed by scratching and rubbing against fixed objects, apparently to relieve itching. Other signs are loss of coordination, weakness, weight loss despite retention of appetite, biting of feet and limbs, lip smacking, and gait abnormalities, including high-stepping of the forelegs, hopping like a rabbit, and swaying of the back end.

An infected animal may appear normal if left undisturbed at rest. However, when stimulated by a sudden noise, excessive movement, or the stress of handling, the animal may tremble or fall down in a convulsive-like state. Several other problems can cause clinical signs similar to scrapie in sheep, including the diseases ovine progressive pneumonia, listeriosis, and rabies; the presence of external parasites (lice and mites); pregnancy toxemia; and toxins.

On the farm, veterinarians diagnose scrapie based on the appearance of its signs combined with knowledge of the animal's history. Scrapie can be diagnosed in the live animal by biopsy of the lymphoid tissues on the inside of the third eyelid. This test is used by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.

USDA has initiated an accelerated scrapie eradication program. The program is based on the following key concepts:
- Identification of preclinical infected sheep through live animal testing and active slaughter surveillance,
- effective tracing of infected animals to their flock/herd of origin made possible as a result of the identification requirements, and
- providing effective genetic based flock cleanup strategies that will allow producers to stay in business, preserve breeding stock, and remain economically viable.

APHIS provides the following to exposed and infected flocks/herds that participate in cleanup or monitoring plans:
- Indemnity for high-risk, suspect, and scrapie positive sheep and goats, which owners agree to destroy,
- scrapie live-animal testing,
- genetic testing, and
- testing of exposed animals that have been sold out of infected and source flocks/herds.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from:
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/animal_diseases/scrapie/downloads/fs_ahscrapie.pdf. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4185993,245.]
See Also
2012
----
Scrapie - Canada (02): (ON), ovine 20120622.1177181
Scrapie - Canada: (ON) ovine 20120501.1119135
2007
----
Scrapie, sheep, goats - USA 20071204.3918
Scrapie, atypical, sheep - USA (WY): 1st report 20070318.0949
2001
----
Scrapie - Canada (Manitoba) 20010113.0104
1998
----
Scrapie - Canada (03) 19980303.0410
Scrapie - Canada (02) 19980225.0370
Scrapie - Canada 19980223.0354
.................................................tg/ao/jw
</body>
