<header id=021734>
Published Date: 2012-12-07 09:48:59 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (02): diagnostics
Archive Number: 20121207.1442473
</header>
<body id=021734>
NOVEL CORONAVIRUS - EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN (02): DIAGNOSTICS
***********************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 5 Dec 2012
Source: Eurosurveillance Edition 2012, 17(49) [summ., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20335


Laboratory capability for molecular detection and confirmation of novel coronavirus in Europe, November 2012
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: Palm D, Pereyaslov D, Vaz J, Broberg E, Zeller H, Gross D, Brown CS, Struelens MJ, on behalf of the Joint ECDC-WHO Regional Office for Europe Novel Coronavirus Laboratory Survey participants; ECDC National Microbiology Focal Points, WHO European Region EuroFlu Network and European Network for Diagnostics of "Imported" Viral Diseases (ENIVD)]

Summary
-------
A rapid survey by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Europe ascertained the availability of national reference laboratory testing for a recently detected novel coronavirus as of 28 Nov 2012. Screening by internal quality controlled upE [upstream from the E gene]-RT-PCR assay was available in 23/46 of responding countries in the WHO European Region, of which 19/30 in European Union (EU) and European Economic Area (EEA) countries. Confirmation of positive screened samples by either 1b [open reading frame 1b]- RT-PCR, or other target RT-PCR assays with sequence analysis or whole-genome sequence analysis was available in 22/46 responding countries of which 18/30 in EU/EEA countries.

Background
----------
In September 2012, a novel coronavirus was first characterised by genome sequencing at the Erasmus Medical Center (EMC) of a viral isolate from a patient in Saudi Arabia with severe pneumonia [1-2]. This virus belongs to the genus _Beta-coronavirus_ and is closely related to some bat coronaviruses. Since then, a total of 9 confirmed cases of human infection with the novel coronavirus have been reported to public health authorities and WHO [3-6]. These patients developed a severe respiratory disease in Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Jordan over the period April to November 2012 and 5 had a fatal outcome [1-6]. 2 patients were referred to Europe for specialised care [1-6].

Coronaviruses are membrane enveloped viruses with large RNA genomes and a distinctive surface crown [hence 'corona' - Mod.CP] causing respiratory and enteric infections in humans and animals. In 2003, zoonotic transmission of SARS-CoV caused a worldwide epidemic associated with more than 8000 cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and a case-fatality rate of 10 percent [7].

Monitoring of novel coronavirus
-------------------------------
While the reservoir and mode of transmission of the novel coronavirus virus are under investigation, WHO and ECDC [European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control] request that any probable or confirmed case that is diagnosed should rapidly (i) be reported to national authorities to enable them to take appropriate public health measures, and (ii) be notified to WHO under the International Health Regulations (2005) and simultaneously through joint reporting system to the Early Warning and Response System (EWRS) for countries in the EU/EEA [3,4,8].

In September 2012, Corman et al described the 1st diagnostic assays for the novel coronavirus [9]. These involve a 2-step screening and confirmation testing algorithm using newly developed specific RT-PCR assays that target the regions upstream of the E [envelope] gene (the upE target; recommended for screening) and open reading frame 1b [polymerase gene] (ORF1b; recommended for confirmation) [9]. Additional testing based on sequence analysis of other viral genome targets or whole genome sequence determination from clinical material or culture isolate can also be used to confirm cases [2,6].

A number of pan-coronavirus RT-PCR assays have been described which target the polymerase gene of coronaviruses used for the detection of known and unknown coronaviruses, including coronaviruses currently circulating in humans such as hCoV-229E, hCoV-NL63, hCoV-OC43, and SARS-CoV [10-12]. Some of these pan-coronavirus RT-PCR assays may be also used to detect the novel coronavirus. However, a positive result should be confirmed by screening for the specific targets described for hCoV-EMC, sequencing of the RT-PCR product and/or virus isolation [1,2,6].

The rapid communication of technical protocols of validated diagnostic assays and distribution of positive RNA control material is essential to provide public health laboratories with the means to screen and confirm cases of this emerging viral disease and allow for appropriate public health response [4,8,13]. WHO is developing laboratory testing guidance on the detection of the novel coronavirus. To obtain background information for the updated guidance and to identify the needs for support by ECDC and WHO Regional Office for Europe to virology laboratories for case ascertainment across Europe, the capability of national laboratories was jointly investigated by questionnaire surveys.

Survey on novel coronavirus detection capabilities
--------------------------------------------------
Two coordinated surveys were administered by email from ECDC and the WHO Regional Office. The ECDC survey was sent to the National Microbiology Focal Points of the 30 EU/EEA countries and in the EU accession country Croatia and to contact points for laboratories in the European Network for Diagnostics of "Imported" Viral Diseases (ENIVD) [14], on 26 Nov 2012. The Regional Office survey was sent to EuroFlu National Focal Points in 53 countries in the WHO European Region on 26 Nov 2012, with a deadline set for 29 Nov 2012. Reminders were sent to the networks after 29 Nov 2012 and an additional 10 replies, received by 3 Dec 2012, were included in this report.

The ECDC survey questions covered 5 areas: national laboratories involved in testing for novel coronavirus, availability of laboratory tests and positive controls, laboratory tests under development, sampling strategy and test referral, and need for support. The Regional Office survey questions covered the following areas: confirmation if the WHO-recognised National Influenza Centre (NIC) or other laboratory serve as national reference laboratory for novel coronavirus testing, availability of laboratory tests and positive controls, and need for support.

Data were validated with request for clarification by the survey respondents on 3 Dec 2012 and confirmed data were received by 4 Dec 2012. Hereafter data from both surveys were merged, duplicate responses removed and validated data analysed jointly by ECDC and Regional Office.

Survey results
--------------
The response rates were 93 percent (28/30 countries) for the EU/EEA countries included in the ECDC survey and 76 percent (40/53 countries) for the WHO Regional Office survey; taken together, the surveys captured data from 46/53 of WHO European Region Member States and all EU/EEA countries. In total, information was provided by 47 countries responding to one or both questionnaires.

The results [available by accessing the original text of this document via the source URL above] indicate which molecular tests were available for novel coronavirus detection and confirmation at national reference or expert laboratory level at the time of the survey. According to recommendations [9,14] screening by internal quality controlled upE- RT-PCR assay was available in 23/46 of responding WHO European Region countries and 19/30 EU/EEA countries. Confirmation of positive screened samples by either ORF1b-RT-PCR, other target RT-PCR assays with sequence analysis or whole genome sequence analysis was available in 18/30 EU/EEA countries and in 22/46 responding WHO European Region countries. [Illustrated by a figure in the original text, available at the source URL above]. The figure indicates the level of screening and confirmation assays available in the 47 responding countries, including 46 WHO European Region Member States, 27 EU Member States, and 3 EEA countries, 2 of which are also Member States of WHO European Region.

Many countries indicated that their reference laboratories were developing specific molecular detection tests, serological assays, or were awaiting positive RNA control material for RT-PCR assays. Therefore, it should be emphasised that the results presented here are an overview of laboratory tests in operation at the time of survey and will require updating as capacities are rapidly increasing in the participating countries.

In 25 countries, the NIC [WHO-recognised National Influenza Centre] reported to be the national reference laboratory for novel coronavirus and in 17 of these countries it was the only laboratory reporting diagnostic capability. In 10 countries, more than one laboratory was reported to perform novel coronavirus diagnostic tests at national or regional levels. 20 laboratories that reported diagnostic capability from 12 countries were members of ENIVD. 12 of 25 countries with no confirmation capacity at national level reported referral arrangements to ship samples for testing in another country.

Of note, laboratories in 6 EU/EEA countries indicated that samples had been tested to date for novel coronavirus from approximately 250 patients fulfilling the WHO definition patients under investigation. Of the 9 cases reported so far to WHO from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Jordan, in addition to in-country testing, 3 have been tested and confirmed by the Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, the Netherlands, the Health Protection Agency, London, United Kingdom, and the Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany [2,5,6].

Conclusions
-----------
The findings of this study indicate an extensive deployment of newly developed novel coronavirus molecular detection assays among public health reference and expert virology laboratories in Europe within only 2 months after sequence information on the 1st reported case was made available. This deployment occurred to a greater extent in EU/EEA countries of the WHO European Region compared with south-east and eastern European countries. Screening tests were available in nearly half of countries of the WHO European Region and cross-border shipment arrangements were in place in many of those lacking domestic testing capacity.

Our results will allow virologists and public health agencies, including ECDC and the WHO Regional Office, to remedy gaps within their laboratory networks. Such measures may include technical laboratory guidance and collaborative arrangements for cross-border referral testing of clinical materials, technical support such as distribution of reference control materials, assistance with development of quality controlled serological assays and, if warranted in the longer term, provision of capacity building courses and external quality assessment schemes.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The complete list of references is available at the source URL above. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

******
[2]
Date: Thu 6 Dec 2012
Source: Eurosurveillance Edition 2012, 17(49) [summ., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20334


Assays for laboratory confirmation of novel human coronavirus (hCoV-EMC) infections
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: Corman VM, Mueller MA, Costabel U, Timm J, Binger T, Meyer B, Kreher P, Lattwein E, Eschbach-Bludau M, Nitsche A, Bleicker T, Landt O, Schweiger B, Drexler JF, Osterhaus AD, Haagmans BL, Dittmer U, Bonin F, Wolff T, Drosten C. Eurosurveillance, Volume 17, Issue 49]

Background
----------
We present a rigorously validated and highly sensitive confirmatory real-time RT-PCR assay (1A assay) that can be used in combination with the previously reported upE assay. 2 additional RT-PCR assays for sequencing are described, targeting the RdRp gene (RdRpSeqassay) and N gene (NSeq assay), where an insertion/deletion polymorphism might exist among different hCoV-EMC strains [that is, isolates of other hCoV-EMC [human Erasmus Medical Centre-like coronaviruses not associated with respiratory disease. - Mod.CP]. Finally, a simplified and biologically safe protocol for detection of antibody response by immunofluorescence microscopy was developed using convalescent patient serum.

A novel human coronavirus, hCoV-EMC, has recently emerged in the Middle East region [1-3]. The virus has caused severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) in at least 9 patients to date. Latest reports from the World Health Organization (WHO) suggest that infections have occurred since April 2012, as hCoV-EMC was found retrospectively in 2 patients from a group of 11 epidemiologically linked cases of SARI in Jordan, 8 of whom were healthcare workers [4].

We have recently presented methods for the rapid detection of hCoV-EMC by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) [2]. One of these protocols, the upE gene assay, has been used as a first-line diagnostic assay for all human cases to date. More than 100 laboratories worldwide have since been equipped with positive-control material necessary to conduct the upE assay. We also presented a confirmatory RT-PCR assay targeting the open reading frame (ORF) 1b gene, with slightly lower sensitivity than the upE assay.

In view of the growing knowledge of the epidemiology of hCoV-EMC infections, WHO is continuously updating its guidelines for laboratory testing. During an expert consultation on 28 Nov 2012, it was concluded that first-line screening should involve the upE assay [2]. Confirmatory testing can involve any appropriately validated RT-PCR assay for alternative targets within the viral genome, followed by sequencing of at least a portion of one viral gene that can then be compared with hCoV-EMC sequences deposited in GenBank.

Recent investigations into a cluster of cases in Saudi Arabia have revealed the possibility that the virus may not be detected by RT-PCR in all patients with symptoms and proven epidemiological linkage [5]. From our previous experience during the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2003, such issues were predicted to occur when testing by RT-PCR alone [2]. In SARS patients, in particular those seen more than 10 days after symptom onset, serological testing by immunofluorescence assay (IFA) has been successfully used to complement RT-PCR findings [6,7].

On 22 Nov 2012, German health authorities were notified of a patient who had been treated for SARI in a hospital in Essen, Germany [5]. On the basis of clinical samples from this case, we present here a set of validated assays for the confirmation of cases of hCoV-EMC infection, including a confirmatory real-time RT-PCR assay in the ORF1a gene, 2 sequencing amplicons in the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and nucleocapsid (N) protein genes, as well as a straightforward methodology for biologically safe immunofluorescence testing.

[The complete text of this communication describes these assays and interested readers are referred to the original source URL above to obtain details of these tests and experimental protocols. - Mod.CP]

Discussion
----------
Here we present nucleic acid-based and serological assays for the confirmation of hCoV-EMC infections. The current strategy and recommendations by WHO require reference laboratories to be involved in cases where 1st-line screening has provided positive results. However, with the potential occurrence of more cases of hCoV-EMC infection, the demand for confirmatory testing might grow in a way that it could overwhelm the capacity of reference laboratories. The major challenge in setting up confirmatory methodology will be the validation of tests. Technical studies can be tedious and clinical validation is hard to achieve if no patient samples are at hand. The documentation here of proven methodology is presented with those laboratories in mind that will have to provide diagnostic testing and additional reference services in the future, but cannot rely on their own validation studies.

For the augmentation of confirmatory testing by serology, IFA, ideally in paired sera taken several days apart, proved highly robust during the SARS epidemic [6,7]. In contrast to EIA [enzyme immunoassay], IFA provides additional criteria for result interpretation via the localisation of signals within cells. False-positive reactivity can thus be circumvented. The data presented here are intended as reference for those laboratories willing to confirm cases of hCoV-EMC infection by IFA. We have shown in this single patient that antibodies were detectable by IFA at a time when the patient still presented severe disease and the virus was not yet eliminated from respiratory secretions as detectable by RT-PCR (case report to be presented elsewhere). As in many SARS patients, the antibody titre was in the medium range, below 1:1000, even in convalescence [6]. In SARS patients, IFA seroconversions usually began to show from day 10 of symptoms onward, while virus RNA could not be detected by RT-PCR in respiratory secretions starting from day 15 onward [6,7].

It is important to mention that IFA slides contain virus-infected cells which in theory could retain infectious virus. However, it has been shown in a meticulous investigation of SARS-CoV that acetone fixation of IFA slides results in the reduction of infectivity to undetectable levels. The extent of reduction of infectivity was at least 6.55 log 10 infectious virus doses [9] (greater reductions could not be measured by the assay applied). In the rapid and biologically safe IFA procedure we presented here, further reduction of any conceivable residues of infectivity was achieved by combining acetone fixation with paraformaldehyde treatment. This treatment was shown to confer efficient reduction on SARS-CoV [9] and is also effective against other enveloped RNA viruses [13]. No residual infectivity should exist in the rapid and biologically safe IFA slides described here.

We have also shown that there is good correlation between IFA results and western blot against the 2 major structural proteins, S and N. Western blotting might therefore be an option as a confirmatory diagnostic for serology. However, in absence of data from a considerably larger number of patients, care must be taken in interpreting the results from western blot alone, as SARS patients were found to vary in their immune responses against single proteins in western blot [14,15]. Not only western blot but also neutralisation tests should be evaluated for their capacity to afford a highly specific confirmation of serological results [7]. This is of particular importance because it is unknown to what extent hCoV-EMC antibodies cross-react with those against common human coronaviruses such as OC43 and HKU1. In the present study, we have not investigated cross-reactivity in a larger group of patients, as this requires meticulous counter-testing and selection of samples with high titres against other human coronaviruses, as well as confirmation by additional methods such as differential virus neutralisation tests. The serological data presented here should be regarded as suggestions for confirmatory testing of epidemiologically linked individuals, or of cases under investigation due to positive results in first-line tests.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The complete list of references is available at the source URLs above. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

[The 1st document is an inventory of the current capability of European diagnostic laboratories to reliably identify the novel coronavirus responsible for the recent ARI cases in the Eastern Mediterranean, and to distinguish it from other human coronaviruses recently in circulation and associated with mild or no human respiratory disease. Interested readers should consult the original text via the source URL to view the data and references cited in the complete text.

In the 2nd document above the authors start with the observe that recent investigations into a cluster of cases in Saudi Arabia have revealed the possibility that the virus may not be detected by RT-PCR in all patients with symptoms and proven epidemiological linkage. The paper then deals with refinement of existing diagnostic methodology and provides descriptions of new methodologies.

The essential message is that in absence of data from a wide range of patients reliance on a single diagnostic procedure can be unreliable. For example in the SARS outbreak it was observed that a considerably larger number of patients SARS patients were found to vary in their immune responses against single proteins in Western blot analyses. Likewise neutralisation tests should be evaluated for their capacity to afford a highly specific confirmation of serological result. This is of particular importance because it is unknown to what extent hCoV-EMC antibodies cross-react with those against common human coronaviruses such as OC43 and HKU1. In the present study, they have not investigated cross-reactivity in a larger group of patients, as this requires meticulous counter-testing and selection of samples with high titres against other human coronaviruses, as well as confirmation by additional methods such as differential virus neutralisation tests. The serological data presented here should be regarded as suggestions for confirmatory testing of epidemiologically linked individuals, or of cases under investigation due to positive results in first-line tests.

Interested readers should access the original text via the source URL to obtain details of the updated molecular and serological methodologies. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean: WHO, Jordan, conf., RFI 20121130.1432498
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (19): Singapore: NOT 20121129.1430397
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (18): WHO, new cases, cluster 20121123.1421664
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (17): 4th case, RFI 20121121.1418018
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (16): whole genome sequence 20121114.1409556
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (15): new case 20121104.1391285
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (14): KSA MOH 20121022.1358297
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (13): history, collateral damage 20121021.1356623
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (12): RFI 20121019.1353615
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (11): clin. lab. & epi. investigations 20121004.1324712
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (10): WHO, revised case def. 20120930.1315960
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (09): real-time RT-PCR, addition 20120929.1315725
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (08): real-time RT-PCR assay 20120928.1314254
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (07): Eurosurveillance reports 20120928.1313337
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (06) 20120927.1311743
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (05): WHO, case def., nomenclature 20120926.1309747
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (04): RFI, Jordan, April 2012 20120925.1308001
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (03): UK HPA, WHO, Qatar 20120923.1305982
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (02): additional cases, RFI 20120923.1305931
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia: human isolate 20120920.1302733
.................................................mpp/cp/mj/mpp
</body>
