<header id=054926>
Published Date: 2015-08-01 18:47:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Brucellosis - Israel
Archive Number: 20150801.3550984
</header>
<body id=054926>
BRUCELLOSIS - ISRAEL
********************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 31 Jul 2015
Source: Jerusalem Post [edited]
http://www.jpost.com/Business-and-Innovation/Health-and-Science/Arab-MKs-claim-brucellosis-epidemic-and-demand-budgets-410733


There was an 83 percent increase in the number of brucellosis (Malta fever) cases in 2014 -- mostly among Beduin in the South and other Arabs in eastern Jerusalem, Nazareth, Acre and elsewhere in the North -- the Knesset Labor, Social Welfare and Health Committee was told on Wed 29 Jul 2015. The condition, which has killed 2 people and caused the hospitalization of nearly 600 more since 2005, is mostly preventable by pasteurization of dairy products.

Health Ministry sources said Thursday, 30 Jul 2015, that they have sent experts to teach farmers and others in the Arab section how to pasteurize dairy products, "but they don't cooperate and listen, and they even hide the products from us, even though we have made it clear that they are causing themselves to get sick."

Not only did the number of people coming down with brucellosis increase by 83 percent in 2014, but the number of those who needed to be hospitalized rose by 30 percent.

In the Knesset committee discussion, MK Ahmad Tibi, a physician, called it a "Third World epidemic" and said that "just in the last 6 months, 217 cases were reported. There is no excuse for this, because Israel has a very high level of medical and agricultural knowhow."

Dr. Nadav Galon, head of veterinary services in the Agricultural Ministry, said he had prepared a program for wiping out brucellosis over the next year or 2 that includes vaccinations, destroying animals with the disease and electronic tagging of animals to keep tabs on them. "We need NIS 100 million [New Israeli Shekels -- 1 shekel is equivalent to about 25 cents in USA dollars - Mod.LL] to carry it out in all parts of the Negev. We gave sheep 4 times as many shots as in the previous year," he said.

A Beduin farmer admitted that members of his community "don't rush to destroy affected animals, because they are our living."

Dr. Farhan Alsana, who is the Health Ministry's official responsible for the southern region, showed a picture of a female camel "who has already infected 14 children. She has not yet been put down."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This discussion from Shemesh AA, Yagupsky Y: Increasing Incidence of Human Brucellosis in Southern Israel after the Cessation of a Veterinarian Control Campaign? Air Water Borne Diseases 2013, 2:2 http://omicsgroup.org/journals/increasing-incidence-of-human-brucellosis-in-southern-israel-after-the-cessation-of-a-veterinarian-control-campaign-2167-7719.1000112.pdf is shown here summarized by ProMED moderator AS in a previous ProMED post (Brucellosis, human, caprine, ovine, camel - Israel: spread 20140622.2558324):

Abstract
--------
The southern region of Israel is populated by a mostly urban Jewish majority (population: 385 200 inhabitants) and a large semi-nomadic Bedouin minority (population: 188 900) who maintain herds of sheep and goats. A retrospective study was conducted to assess the impact of the 1997 decision to discontinue a veterinarian control campaign on the epidemiology of human brucellosis in the region.

Discussion
----------
Brucellosis appears to have been endemic to Middle East countries since ancient times affecting domesticated animals and humans as well. In modern times, rigorous control measures instituted by the Israel Ministry of Agriculture have eliminated brucellosis caused by _B. abortus_ among bovines, making the industrialized milk product supply safe. _Brucella melitensis_, however, continued to be endemic among sheep and goats, especially in nomadic Bedouin herds, and the veterinary control of the disease in this setting encountered serious logistic difficulties such as geographical dispersion of small herds, lack of shepherds' incentive to participate in the program, budgetary constraints, and illegal trade in infected animals. Although cessation of the eradication campaign in 1997 could have been justified by the steady decline in the endemic level of brucellosis observed countrywide, the present data clearly show that the disease was far from being brought to control in southern Israel. The results of the study demonstrate that, after a decline in the incidence of brucellosis in the early 2000's, starting in 2007, rates increased again and significantly exceeded the 1997 endemic level in 2012.

The relationship between the timing of the cessation of the veterinary control campaign and the epidemiological changes in the incidence of human disease in the Negev region is, therefore, not obvious. It is speculated that control measures did, in fact, decrease the prevalence of the zoonosis among domesticated animals because most infected sheep and goats were slaughtered and replaced by immunized animals, reducing the source of human contagion. Although the campaign was discontinued in 1997, its effect was still felt at the beginning of the following decade resulting in low attack rate of human infections. It is speculated that because the disease was not completely eradicated, brucellosis slowly built-up among animal herds, taking a few years before it spilled-over to the human population of the region. Close examination of the data demonstrate that the disease remained almost limited to Negev Bedouins who, although undergoing a rapid process of modernization and settlement in permanent towns, still keep goat and sheep herds and consume unpasteurized dairy products. The average incidence of brucellosis in the Bedouin community for the 11-year period (77.9 per 100 000 population) is appalling and ranks 2nd only to that reported among the population of neighboring Syria. These results indicate that countrywide data may overlook the incidence of a locally-endemic infection by diluting cases of disease amidst a large global denominator, and imply that the true magnitude of the problem should be assessed using specific data for the relevant population at risk.

The incidence rate of human brucellosis found in the present study can be considered only a minimal estimate. The study design did not include a small proportion of patients who could have been diagnosed in a few small clinical microbiology laboratories other than the CMLSUNC [Clinical Microbiology Laboratory of the Soroka University Medical Center, city of Beer-Sheva].

In addition, the protean clinical manifestations of human brucellosis may mimic other infectious and non-infectious conditions and, therefore, the true nature of the symptoms and signs may be easily missed. In a previous study conducted in southern Israel, isolation of _B. melitensis_ was frequently an unexpected finding in febrile Bedouin patients in whom the disease was not suspected. In a study conducted in the region, active search for the disease among relatives of 4 index patients with brucellosis resulted in the detection of an additional 12 undiagnosed cases. A similar experience was reported in Saudi Arabia, where screening of 404 family members of 55 diagnosed cases revealed an additional 53 (13.1 percent) serologically positive individuals, of which 9 were also bacteremic.

Conclusions
-----------
Human brucellosis caused by _B. melitensis_ has reemerged as a serious public health threat to the Bedouin population of southern Israel in recent years. The Israel Ministry of Agriculture should reconsider its premature decision to terminate veterinary measures aimed to control brucellosis in domesticated animals, and implement a public education campaign to reduce human exposure to this preventable zoonotic disease. - Mod.LL]

[Human brucellosis in Israel is caused exclusively by _Brucella melitensis_, mostly byproducts from infected small ruminants (goats and sheep) and direct contact with them. Occasionally, cattle are infected as well and become another source of human infection. In the not-too-far past, several high-producing dairy herds were infected with subsequent infection in their personnel. _Brucella abortus_, causing bovine brucellosis, has been successfully eradicated in Israel decades back.

The deterioration in the brucellosis situation can be seen from the following statistics published by Israel's Ministry of Health. According to their most recent available Weekly Epidemiological Report, as of 18 Jul 2015 the accumulated number of officially reported new human brucellosis cases since the beginning of 2015 was 252, compared to 368 during the same period in 2014. It remains to be seen if these figures herald a halt in the sharp increase seen during the previous 3 years. The annual figures since 2005 are the following: 2005 - 141, 2006 - 138, 2007 - 152, 2008 - 149, 2009 - 136, 2010 - 139, 2012 - 183, 2013 - 336, 2014 - 603 (a record of all times). Such increase may not be attributed to a change in the hygiene measures in patients' kitchens (deplorable as they may be) but to increased exposure to the pathogen, namely spread within the animal vectors. Unfortunately, humans became the sentinels to animal infection. The financial losses caused by the disease to animal owners (abortions in sheep and goats) are much lower than the devastating damage to human health; this is an obstacle in obtaining the owners' cooperation, unless control measures, including vaccination and animal identification, are free of charge and full, immediate compensations are paid when required. The story, in the above media report, about the infected/infective camel still kept alive -- if true -- is alarming.

The disease has, in the past, been seen to spill over into all segments of the population (several veterinarians and laboratory personnel included). Even if the budget mentioned in the media report (about USD 30 million) is obtained, while the required manpower and policing support available and privatization of the State Veterinary Service put on halt, the timeframe for eradication will be (much) longer than the one mentioned in the media report. This is a long-term issue, requiring the safeguarding of budget for its entire duration, and a One Health attitude. - Mod.AS

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3550984,90.]
See Also
2014
----
Brucellosis, human, caprine, ovine, camel - Israel: spread 20140622.2558324
Brucellosis, human - Israel: (HZ) RFI 20140607.2525983
Brucellosis, human, livestock - Israel: (HZ) RFI 20140513.2467609
.................................................sb/ll/arn/je/lm
</body>
