<header id=037685>
Published Date: 2019-09-28 15:22:35 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Vaping-related illness - North America (01): Canada, USA, CDC updates
Archive Number: 20190928.6699608
</header>
<body id=037685>
VAPING-RELATED ILLNESS - NORTH AMERICA (01): CANADA, USA, CDC UPDATES
*********************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Canada (Quebec) - case reported
[2] CDC overview of outbreak (USA) - MMWR
[3] Investigation on product use USA (Illinois, Wisconsin) - MMWR
[4] CDC press conference - media report

******
[1] Canada (Quebec) - case reported
Date: Fri 27 Sep 2019
Source: Montreal Gazette [edited]
https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/first-case-of-vaping-related-lung-disease-reported-in-quebec


Quebec has reported its 1st case of severe lung disease linked to vaping, the provincial health ministry has confirmed.

A man in his 50s who started vaping in April [2019] developed chest pain and had trouble breathing. However, the man has since recovered, Dr. Mylene Drouin of the Montreal Public Health Department told reporters at a news conference on Friday [27 Sep 2019]. He chose to vape as a means to stop smoking.

The Quebec case is the 2nd to be reported thus far in Canada. On [18 Sep 2019] a high-school student from London, Ontario, was placed temporarily on life support after using e-cigarettes but was later released from hospital, according to the local health authority in the province.

Dr. Horacio Arruda, Quebec's top public health officer, reiterated the risks associated with vaping at Friday's news conference. "Following the confirmation of this 1st case in Quebec, it is necessary to reiterate the importance of remaining vigilant," Arruda said in a statement.

"People with health concerns should tell their health-care professional if they are vaping or have been vaping, as well as the devices and substances used. Every case is taken seriously and the Health Ministry continues to monitor developments in Quebec closely."

In a [10 Sep 2019] warning, Arruda urged young people, pregnant women and non-smokers to refrain from using electronic cigarettes. "It is important to remember vaping is not without risk, and its long-term effects are not yet known," Arruda said at the time. "In this context, the population is encouraged to be vigilant."

On [4 Sep 2019], Health Canada issued a statement about a possible link between the use of vaping products and cases of a potentially deadly pulmonary disease in the USA.

The American Medical Association on Monday [23 Sep 2019] advised US residents to stop vaping of any sort until scientists gain a better understanding of the cause of more than 530 lung illnesses and at least 12 deaths they believe are related to the use of the products.

Once activated, the e-cigarette heats a liquid to turn it into an aerosol, allowing vaping. Unlike conventional cigarettes, electronic cigarettes do not involve combustion or tobacco. Most liquids in e-cigarettes contain nicotine, propylene glycol or vegetable glycerin, as well as artificial flavours. Several other chemical components can be found in the liquids or in the aerosol.

E-cigarettes are also known by other names like mods, pods, vaping pens, sub-ohm, tank devices, electronic nicotine inhaler and vape.

The Quebec health ministry has noted in some of the cases, people had used vaping products that contained cannabinoids such as tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).

"It should be noted that products from illegal or unregulated sources are particularly avoidable, as they carry additional risks," the ministry added. "Vaping devices and liquids should also not be modified or used in a manner not intended by the manufacturer."

Should authorities identify a clearly noxious substance in the products shown to be responsible for severe lung disease, a ban could be enforced, but no decision has been reached. Last week [24 Sep 2019], the state of Massachusetts announced a 4-month ban on vaping products.

[Byline: Aaron Derfel]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] CDC overview of outbreak (USA) - MMWR
Date: Fri 27 Sep 2019
Source: CDC [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6839e1.htm?s_cid=mm6839e1_e&deliveryName=USCDC_921-DM9775


Citation: Perrine CG, Pickens CM, Boehmer TK, et al. Characteristics of a multistate outbreak of lung injury associated with e-cigarette use, or vaping -- United States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub: 27 Sep 2019. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6839e1

[Citations of references and complete list of authors and their affiliations are listed at the source URL. - Mod.TG]

Summary
----------
What is already known about this topic?
Lung injury associated with e-cigarette use, or vaping, has recently been reported in most states. CDC, the Food and Drug Administration, and others are investigating this outbreak.

What is added by this report?
Among 805 cases reported as of [24 Sep 2019], 69% were in males; 62% of patients were aged 18-34 years. Among patients with data on substances used in e-cigarettes, or vaping products, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-containing product use was reported by 76.9% (36.0% reported exclusive THC-product use); 56.8% reported nicotine-containing product use (16.0% reported exclusive nicotine-product use).

What are the implications for public health practice?
The cause of the outbreak is unknown. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC.

Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), also called vapes, e-hookas, vape pens, tank systems, mods, and electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), are electronic devices that produce an aerosol by heating a liquid typically containing nicotine, flavorings, and other additives; users inhale this aerosol into their lungs (1). E-cigarettes also can be used to deliver tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the principal psychoactive component of cannabis (1). Use of e-cigarettes is commonly called vaping. Lung injury associated with e-cigarette use, or vaping, has recently been reported in most states (2-4). CDC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), state and local health departments, and others are investigating this outbreak. This report provides data on patterns of the outbreak and characteristics of patients, including sex, age, and selected substances used in e-cigarette, or vaping, products reported to CDC as part of this ongoing multistate investigation. As of [24 Sep 2019], 46 state health departments and one territorial health department had reported 805 patients with cases of lung injury associated with use of e-cigarette, or vaping, products to CDC. [Of these patients] 69% were males, and the median age was 23 years (range = 13-72 years). To date, 12 deaths have been confirmed in 10 states. Among 514 patients with information on substances used in e-cigarettes, or vaping products, in the 30 days preceding symptom onset, 76.9% reported using THC-containing products, and 56.8% reported using nicotine-containing products; 36.0% reported exclusive use of THC-containing products, and 16.0% reported exclusive use of nicotine-containing products. The specific chemical exposure(s) causing the outbreak is currently unknown. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC. CDC will continue to work in collaboration with FDA and state and local partners to investigate cases and advise and alert the public on the investigation as additional information becomes available.

State health departments, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE), and CDC have developed definitions for confirmed and probable cases (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/assets/2019-Lung-Injury-Surveillance-Case-Definition-508.pdf) and medical chart abstraction and case interview forms. The case definition, forms, and instructions for reporting cases were disseminated to all state health departments in late August 2019. Patients with cases of lung injury associated with e-cigarette use, or vaping, had 1) a history of e-cigarette use, vaping, or dabbing (vaping concentrated marijuana) within 90 days before symptom onset; 2) imaging studies showing lung injury; 3) absence of evidence of infection (confirmed cases) or infection not thought to be the sole cause of the lung injury or infectious disease testing not performed (probable cases); and 4) absence of alternative plausible diagnoses. Most states are reporting case counts to CDC as case status is determined; however, it can take up to several weeks to complete and submit information from medical chart abstraction and interviews. Additional time might be required after the information is submitted to CDC to clean and standardize data submitted in different formats. This report summarizes patterns of the lung injury outbreak and characteristics of cases reported to CDC, including demographic characteristics and selected substances used by patients. (CDC determined the intent of this project to be public health practice for disease and injury control; thus, the activity is not research involving human subjects and Institutional Review Board approval was not required [OMB No. 0920-1011].)

As of [24 Sep 2019], 805 cases of lung injury from 46 states and one territory had been reported to CDC. Among the 805 cases reported, basic patient data (i.e., demographics and dates of symptom onset and hospitalization) were received for 771 (96%) patients. Ninety-one percent of patients were hospitalized. Median duration between symptom onset and hospitalization was 6 days (range, 0-158 days). Although some cases occurred during April-June 2019, the number of cases began increasing in early July [2019]. The decline in reporting of onset dates and hospitalizations in the most recent 3-4 weeks is the result, in part, of a lag in reporting; there is no evidence that occurrence of lung injury cases is declining.

[Of the patients], 69% were male. Median age was 23 years (range = 13-72 years); 61.9% were aged 18-34 years, and 16.2% were aged less than 18 years. Among the 12 deaths reported to CDC, 58% occurred in men, and the median age was 50 years (range, 27-71 years). Among a subset of 514 patients (63.8%) for whom information on substances used in e-cigarettes, or vaping, products was available, 395 (76.9%) reported using THC-containing products, and 292 (56.8%) reported using nicotine-containing products in the 30 days preceding symptom onset; 210 patients (40.9%) reported using both THC-containing and nicotine-containing products, 185 (36.0%) reported exclusive use of THC-containing products, and 82 (16.0%) reported exclusive use of nicotine-containing products.

Discussion
------------
E-cigarettes were introduced to the US market in 2007 (1). In 2018, 20.8% of high school students reported current e-cigarette use (5). E-cigarette use is markedly lower among US adults than among youths; in 2018, only 3.2% of adults currently used e-cigarettes, with higher prevalences among persons aged 18-24 years (7.6%) and 25-34 years (5.4%) than among older age-groups (6). Approximately three-fourths of patients in this investigation were aged less than 35 years. In the general US adult population, current e-cigarette use is slightly higher among males than females for both adults and youths (6); in the present investigation, approximately 7 in 10 cases occurred in males. In this investigation, 62% of patients were aged 18-34 years; this is consistent with the age-group with highest reported prevalence of marijuana use in the preceding 30 days in the USA (7).

THC-containing and nicotine-containing products were the most commonly reported substances used in e-cigarettes, or vaping products, by patients. Specific data on use of THC in e-cigarettes, or vaping products, in the general population are limited; among US middle and high school students in 2016 who had ever used an e-cigarette, 30.6% reported using THC in an e-cigarette (33.3% among males and 27.2% among females) (8). Among adults who reported using marijuana in 2014, 9.9% reported consuming it via a vaporizer or other electronic device (11.5% among men and 7.8% among women) (9). In a recent study of college students, approximately 75% of those who had used substances other than nicotine in e-cigarettes reported using marijuana or THC-containing products in an e-cigarette (10). Because information about substance use in this investigation was self-reported, the information is not available for some cases because of the time required for completing and reporting patient interviews, inability to conduct interviews (e.g., patient refusal, loss to follow-up, persons who were too ill or died before they could be interviewed) and missing data for certain variables (e.g., patient refusal to answer certain questions). In addition, patients might not always know what substances they use or might be hesitant to reveal use of substances that are not legal in their state.

Continued monitoring of patient case counts and characteristics, as well as substances used with e-cigarette, or vaping, products, is critical to informing the ongoing investigation and helping to identify the cause. CDC and state health departments continue to collect and analyze epidemiologic data to better understand what types of devices and products patients are using (e.g., cartridges and e-liquids), the source of products or location where they were obtained, and the patterns (e.g., duration and frequency) of specific product use. Given the vast number of chemicals used in e-cigarette, or vaping, products, it is important to link epidemiologic data with findings from laboratory analyses of products and clinical specimens from patients. Federal, state, and private laboratories are working to collect and analyze products obtained from patients with lung injury associated with e-cigarette use, or vaping. In addition, CDC, clinical, and public health laboratories are collecting clinical specimens for future targeted analyses of substances identified in product samples.

The specific chemical exposure(s) causing this outbreak is unknown at this time. National data to date show that most lung injury patients with data on substance use report using THC-containing products with or without nicotine-containing products, although some patients report using only nicotine-containing products. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC. Persons who continue to use e-cigarettes or vaping products should carefully monitor themselves and seek medical attention immediately if they have symptoms consistent with those described in this outbreak (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/need-to-know/index.html).

Regardless of the investigation, e-cigarettes, or vaping products, should never be used by youths, young adults, pregnant women, or by adults who do not currently use tobacco products (2). Adults who use e-cigarettes because they have quit smoking should not return to smoking combustible cigarettes. In addition, persons who use e-cigarettes or vaping products should not get them from informal sources or off the street and should not modify e-cigarette, or vaping, devices or add any substances that are not intended by the manufacturer. Both THC-containing and nicotine-containing e-cigarette, or vaping, products purchased legally within states might also contain harmful substances (1); it is difficult for consumers to know what is in these products, and full ingredient lists are typically not available. THC use has been associated with a wide range of health effects, particularly with prolonged heavy use (http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/reports/2017/health-effects-of-cannabis-and-cannabinoids.aspx). The best way to avoid potentially harmful effects is to not use THC, including through e-cigarette, or vaping, devices. Persons with marijuana use disorder should seek evidence-based treatment by a healthcare provider.

This investigation is ongoing. CDC will continue to work in collaboration with FDA and state and local partners to investigate cases and advise and alert the public on the investigation as additional information becomes available.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3] Investigation on product use USA (Illinois, Wisconsin) - MMWR
Date: Fri 27 Sep 2019
Source: CDC [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6839e2.htm?s_cid=mm6839e2_w


Citation: Ghinai I, Pray IW, Navon L, et al. E-cigarette product use, or vaping, among persons with associated lung injury -- Illinois and Wisconsin, April-September 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep ePub: 27 Sep 2019. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6839e2.

[References, tables and graphs can be found at the source URL.]

Summary
----------
What is already known about this subject?
An outbreak of lung injury of unknown source associated with electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) use is ongoing in the USA.

What is added by this report?
Interviews about e-cigarette use were completed with 86 patients in Illinois and Wisconsin. Use of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-containing e-cigarette products, the majority of which were prefilled cartridges obtained from informal sources, was reported by 87% of patients during the 3 months preceding illness.

What are the implications for public health practice?
The cause of this outbreak is unknown but might be related to prefilled THC cartridges. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC. Additional information from product testing and traceback could help to determine the source of the outbreak and prevent future illnesses.

In July 2019, the Illinois Department of Public Health and the Wisconsin Department of Health Services launched a coordinated epidemiologic investigation after receiving reports of several cases of lung injury in previously healthy persons who reported electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) use, or vaping (1). This report describes features of e-cigarette product use by patients in Illinois and Wisconsin. Detailed patient interviews were conducted by telephone, in person, or via the Internet with 86 (68%) of 127 patients. Overall, 75 (87%) of 86 interviewed patients reported using e-cigarette products containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and 61 (71%) reported using nicotine-containing products. Numerous products and brand names were identified by patients. Nearly all (96%) THC-containing products reported were packaged, prefilled cartridges, and 89% were primarily acquired from informal sources (e.g., friends, family members, illicit dealers, or off the street). In contrast, 77% of nicotine-containing products were sold as prefilled cartridges, and 83% were obtained from commercial vendors. The precise source of this outbreak is currently unknown (2); however, the predominant use of prefilled THC-containing cartridges among patients with lung injury associated with e-cigarette use suggests that they play an important role. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC. Given the diversity of products reported and frequency of patients using both THC- and nicotine-containing e-cigarette products, additional methods such as product testing and traceback could help identify the specific cause of this outbreak.

During July-September 2019, possible cases of lung injury associated with e-cigarette use in Illinois and Wisconsin were investigated to determine symptoms, exposures, and medical care history related to the outbreak. Patients were classified as having confirmed or probable cases of lung injury associated with e-cigarette use according to CDC's interim outbreak case definitions (3). Interviews were conducted with patients or a proxy using a structured and scripted questionnaire that was developed jointly between Illinois and Wisconsin with guidance from CDC. The questionnaire asked detailed questions about e-cigarette use, including the names of e-cigarette, or vaping, products and devices, frequency of use, and product sources in the 3 months preceding illness onset. Most interviews were conducted by state or local health department staff members or in person by healthcare facility staff members during a patient's hospitalization; a small number of patients completed the same survey online. In total, 86 (68%) interviews were completed among the 127 confirmed and probable patients that had been identified in Illinois (75) and Wisconsin (52) as of [20 Sep 2019].

Among the 86 confirmed and probable patients that were interviewed, including 48 from Illinois and 38 from Wisconsin, 68 (79%) were male, and the median age was 21 years (range = 15-53 years) ([Table 1. Patient characteristics by type of electronic cigarette, or vaping, product used in the 3 months prior to illness onset - Illinois and Wisconsin, 2019]). Hospitalization dates among patients were similar in Illinois and Wisconsin, ranging from [24 Apr 2019 to 19 Sep 2019], and closely reflected the national outbreak (2). Illinois cases predominantly occurred in the northeast region of the state (in Chicago and the surrounding counties, close to the Wisconsin border) but have since been reported in other regions of the state. Most Wisconsin cases were initially clustered in the southeastern region of the state but have since been reported throughout western and central Wisconsin as well.

Among the 86 interviewed patients, 75 (87%) reported using e-cigarette products containing THC, the principal psychoactive component of cannabis, during the 3 months preceding illness; 61 (71%) reported using nicotine-containing products; 50 (58%) reported using both THC- and nicotine-containing products. In addition, 25 (29%) patients reported exclusive use of THC-containing products, whereas 11 (13%) reported exclusive use of nicotine-containing products ([Table 2. Electronic cigarette (e-cigarette), or vaping, product use behaviors in the 3 months prior to illness onset in patients with lung injury associated with e-cigarette use - Illinois and Wisconsin, 2019]). Demographic characteristics of patients were similar among those who reported exclusive use of THC-containing products, exclusive use of nicotine-containing products, or use of both types of products (Table 1).

The chemical contents of reported THC-containing products are unknown. However, urinary THC screens were obtained for 32 patients who reported using THC-containing products, 29 (91%) of which were positive for THC; 2 patients who did not report using THC-containing e-cigarette products, out of 4 tested, also had positive urinary THC screens; one of these patients reported smoking combustible marijuana. Urinary THC levels for 4 patients who reported using THC-containing products exceeded 400 ng/mL, indicating intensive use of THC or THC-containing products (4,5). In Wisconsin, 8 patients initially denied using THC-containing products in interviews, but 5 (63%) were later found to have used THC through review of medical charts, reinterview, or cross-referencing with friends who were also interviewed as patients.

Among the 86 interviewed patients, 234 unique e-cigarette, or vaping, products labeled with 87 different brand names were reported. Nicotine-containing product users reported a mean of 1.3 different nicotine brands (range = 1-4), and THC-containing product users reported a mean of 2.1 different THC brands (range = 1-7). Among 155 THC-containing products reported, nearly all (149; 96%) were packaged, prefilled cartridges, whereas 61 (77%) of 79 nicotine-containing products were sold as prefilled cartridges or "pods." No patients reported adding other ingredients to the e-cigarette products they used. Although no single brand name was reported by all patients, a prefilled THC cartridge sold under the brand name Dank Vapes was reported by 57 (66%) patients ([Figure. Frequently reported brand names of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)- and nicotine-containing electronic cigarette (e-cigarette), or vaping, products reported by patients with lung injury - Illinois and Wisconsin, 2019]). In Wisconsin, 2 groups of friends (2 patients in one group and 3 in the 2nd group) who became ill after using THC-containing cartridges specifically reported sharing Dank Vapes cartridges. Dank Vapes was the only e-cigarette product reported by one of the patients.

Among 112 THC-containing products for which the source was reported, 100 (89%) were acquired from informal sources (e.g., friends, family, school, dealers, or off the street). The remaining 12 were bought at an out-of-state cannabis dispensary (6), online (5), or from a vape or tobacco shop (1). In contrast, among 81 nicotine-containing products, 40 (49%) were obtained from a vape or tobacco shop, 22 (27%) from gas stations or convenience stores, 14 (17%) from friends or family, and 5 (6%) online.

A variety of e-cigarette and vaping device types (6) were used by patients to aerosolize THC- or nicotine-containing products. Overall, 78 (92%) of 85 patients reported using a device designed to aerosolize prefilled cartridges or pods. Within this category of vaping devices, some were closed-pod systems (also known as "mods") designed for use with proprietary nicotine-containing products (e.g., JUUL); however, most were universal "vape pens" that are adaptable to the prefilled THC cartridges reported by many patients. Use of devices with a tank designed to be filled with nicotine-containing liquid or THC oil was reported by 18 (21%) patients, and 14 (16%) reported aerosolizing THC concentrates, known as waxes or "dabs," using either a "dab rig" or a "dab pen" device.

Patients reported frequent daily use of e-cigarette products; among 75 users of THC-containing products, 49 (65%) reported using these products at least daily, and 45 (74%) of 61 nicotine-containing product users reported at least daily use of these products. Where more detailed information on frequency of use was provided, 21 (41%) of 51 THC-containing product users and 30 (65%) of 46 nicotine-containing product users reported use of at least one such product 5 or more times a day. In addition to e-cigarette products, among 83 patients who provided information on combustible product use, 43 (52%) reported smoking combustible marijuana, and 20 (24%) reported smoking combustible tobacco.

Only 4 (5%) of 86 interviewed patients reported prescription drug misuse or illicit drug use other than THC. Two patients reported using LSD, one reported misusing dextroamphetamine-amphetamine (Adderall), and one reported misusing oxycodone. Urinary toxicology screens were positive for substances other than THC (and for other substances that could not be explained by the medical treatment these patients had received) in 6 of 31 patients, including 2 patients who tested positive for benzodiazepines and opioids, one for benzodiazepines alone, one for opioids alone, one for amphetamines, and one for unspecified narcotics.

Discussion
------------
In this series of in-depth interviews with 86 e-cigarette- or vaping-associated lung injury patients in Illinois and Wisconsin during July-September 2019, patients reported a wide range of e-cigarette products; however, the vast majority reported using illicit THC-containing products sold as prefilled cartridges and obtained from informal sources. Although no single brand or product was definitively identified, a high percentage of patients reported using Dank Vapes cartridges. Dank Vapes appears to be the most prominent in a class of largely counterfeit brands, with common packaging that is easily available online and that is used by distributors to market THC-containing cartridges with no obvious centralized production or distribution (7).

Previous reports highlighted that patients with lung injury associated with e-cigarette use have used both THC- and nicotine-containing products (1,3,8,9). The additional information presented here regarding the range and diversity of brands used by patients, acquisition patterns, and frequency of use helps to formulate hypotheses about the possible etiology of this outbreak. In particular, the high level of use of prefilled THC cartridges, used in a range of different devices, suggests that the cartridges might play an important role.

The findings in this report are subject to at least 4 limitations: 1st, interviews were not available for one-third of patients; this nonresponse rate might introduce selection bias, although the demographics of the 86 interviewed patients were similar to those of all 127 patients. 2nd, because information was self-reported, there is the possibility that social desirability bias might affect reporting, particularly of illicit products; nonmedical THC use is currently illegal in both Illinois and Wisconsin. In this analysis, some patients did not disclose THC-containing product use to clinicians until late in their hospital admission or until a urinary THC screen was performed. 3rd, the time between urinary toxicology testing and last reported use of an e-cigarette product was not consistent and might explain the 3 negative results in patients who reported using THC-containing products. Finally, these data are largely drawn from patients living in the northeastern region of Illinois and southeastern region of Wisconsin, and therefore might not be generalizable to other states; however, the age and gender distribution is consistent with nationwide trends (2,3).

The findings document that many, but not all, patients with lung injury associated with use of an e-cigarette product reported using THC-containing products. Similar findings have been noted in the national data, which include some of the data presented here (2). These data also reveal a predominant use of prefilled THC cartridges sold through informal and unregulated markets, although the origin of these products further back in the production and distribution chain is unknown. In addition, these data do not elucidate whether the causative exposure is THC itself or a substance associated with prefilled THC cartridges, such as a cutting agent or adulterant. Ascertaining the importance of these products in contributing to the current outbreak will require data from multiple states and analysis at the national level.

Given the number and diversity of products reported overall and by individual patients, as well as the high frequency of patients using both THC- and nicotine-containing products, the epidemiologic investigation could benefit from additional information, including product testing and traceback of e-cigarette products to identify the ultimate source of the outbreak. The Illinois Department of Public Health and the Wisconsin Department of Health Services are collaborating with CDC on a large nationwide public health response and with the Food and Drug Administration to coordinate laboratory testing of products associated with this outbreak. While this investigation is ongoing, CDC recommends that persons consider refraining from using e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly those containing THC.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[While the limitations of the above study done in Illinois and Wisconsin may presently preclude definitively concluding that the THC-containing products may be associated with the severe lung injuries seen, the data are highly suggestive. We await further studies adding to the database, allowing more definitive conclusions. - Mod.MPP]

******
[4] CDC press conference - media report
Date: Fri 27 Sep 2019
Source: Time.com [edited]
https://time.com/5688229/cdc-thc-vaping-deaths/


For the 1st time, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said it suspects vaping THC -- a compound in marijuana -- is tied to the hundreds of lung illnesses and at least 12 deaths that have been reported across the country.

During a press briefing on Friday [27 Sep 2019], CDC officials said the latest findings of their investigation "suggest THC products play a role in the outbreak." Previously, the CDC reported that many of the sick people reported using THC in their vape pens, but officials stopped short of tying the illnesses to the drug.

In data collected from more than 500 patients, 77% reported using THC products or using both THC and nicotine. About 36% reported using only products with THC. The CDC said 16% of patients said they only vaped nicotine and not THC.

This information is based on self-reports from patients.

Officials in Illinois and Wisconsin said that "Dank Vapes" was the most common used brand of THC-filled cartridges in their states. "Dank Vapes" is a very popular brand and easily obtainable, according to officials. The CDC interviewed 86 patients who had lung-related issues tied to e-cigarettes in the 2 states. Around 70% of those patients said they used "Dank Vapes," according to the CDC.

The CDC also said "Dank Vapes" appears to be the leader in a large class of counterfeit brands of vape cartridges with THC that have similar packaging and are easy to buy online and in stores.

Others labels include TKO, Off White, Moon Rocks, Cookies, Chronic Carts, Mario Carts, Kingpen, California Confidential, Cereal Carts and Supreme G.

"We are in the midst of a complex investigation that spans nearly all states and involves serious life-threatening disease in young people," Dr. Anne Schuchat, the Principal Deputy Director of the CDC said at the briefing.

There are 805 confirmed and probable cases of lung injury tied to vaping, according to the CDC. The CDC has also reported 12 deaths tied to vaping, but it expects that number to rise as state and local officials report these kind of deaths to the CDC. The Associated Press counted 13 vaping deaths so far.

"Sadly I do believe there are additional ones [deaths]," Schuchat said.

Though the CDC has found a pattern with THC, officials said they are still unable to say what exactly is making people sick.

"We can unfortunately not identify one product, brand, source or device common across all patients," Dr. Jennifer Layden, Illinois's Chief Medical Officer and State Epidemiologist said at the briefing.

The CDC continues to suggest that people consider not using e-cigarettes at all, especially ones that contain THC.

[Byline: Josiah Bates]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Cases of vaping continue to occur. Some are linked to THC, and apparently some may not be or the person vaping may not realize THC is in the product.

If some of these vaping solutions are normally using propylene glycol, I wonder if an unfortunate substitution of ethylene glycol could have occurred? Perhaps the officials are looking into all of the ingredients and, we can hope, the source of the ingredients.

Like many products, the source material may be from one supplier and branded by the packaging or by one other tiny ingredient added by the brand of a product. For example: Peanut butter all has peanuts, but some brands may have sugar while some have an artificial sweetener or no sweetener at all. Perhaps something similar is occurring with different vaping brands or sources?

Certainly, we hope the problem is quickly identified. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps:
Canada: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6699608,12
United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6699608,10]
See Also
Vaping-related illness - USA (05): update 20190927.6696977
Vaping-related illness - USA (04): (KS) deaths 20190925.6692937
Vaping-related illness - USA (03): deaths, CDC 20190919.6682101
Vaping-related illness - USA (02): flavoring ban 20190913.6671715
Vaping-related illness - USA: oil, contaminant suspected, fatal 20190907.6661874
2018
----
Vaping solution ingestion - UK (Scotland): serious toxicity 20181216.6211738
.................................................sb/tg/rd/mpp/rd/mpp
</body>
