<header id=041406>
Published Date: 2019-07-16 22:18:03 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ebola update (67): Congo DR (NK,IT) cases, WHO, Goma
Archive Number: 20190717.6571650
</header>
<body id=041406>
EBOLA UPDATE (67): DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (NORTH KIVU, ITURI) CASES, WHO, GOMA
************************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Case update
- Epidemiological situation report, 14 Jul 2019, DRC Ministry of Health
[2] WHO meeting
- Speech
- Analysis
[3] Goma pastor
- Death of pastor
- Contact tracing
- Rwanda
- Helen Branswell
[4] Opinion
- Kaiser Daily Global Health Policy Report
- Science
- The New York Times
- London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
- British Medical Journal

******
[1] Case update
- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Epidemiological situation report, DRC Ministry of Health
[in French, machine trans., abridged, edited]
https://us13.campaign-archive.com/?u=89e5755d2cca4840b1af93176&id=f09f479a42

The epidemiological situation of the Ebola virus disease in the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri dated 14 Jul 2019:
- Since the beginning of the epidemic, the number of accumulated cases is 2501, including 2407 confirmed and 94 probable. In total, there have been 1668 deaths (1574 in confirmed and 94 in probable cases) and 700 cases have recovered.
- 292 suspected cases under investigation;
-12 newly confirmed cases including 7 in Beni and 1 each in Oicha, Mutwanga, Kalunguta, Mandima, and Goma;
- The case of Goma will be reclassified as soon as the detailed investigations have accurately determined the health zone where [the case] developed symptoms.
- 6 new cases of confirmed deaths: 4 community deaths, including 3 in Beni and 1 in Oicha, and 2 deaths in CTEs, including 1 in Beni and 1 in Katwa;
Note: Of the 7 deaths reported 13 Jul 2019, 3 were non-cases and were removed from the database.
- 2 people treated at Butembo CTE [Ebola treatment centre] recovered.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] WHO meeting
- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Speech
[WHO, edited]
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/high-level-event-on-ebola-virus-disease-in-drc

High-level event on Ebola virus disease in DRC: Speech by WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus
--------------------------------
Thank you, Mark, and thank you for your leadership and partnership.
Please accept my respect and appreciation.
Your excellency, Oly Ilunga,
The right honourable Rory Stewart,
Excellencies, colleagues, friends:

Yesterday, WHO was notified of 2 very sad developments in the Ebola outbreak in DRC. The 1st was a case of Ebola in the city of Goma, in a pastor who had traveled from Butembo. Although this is a very concerning development, it's one that we and the government have expected and prepared for. Around 3000 people have been vaccinated, and the pastor is receiving care at an Ebola treatment centre run by the Ministry of Health and Medecins sans Frontieres. The 2nd was that 2 Ebola responders were murdered in their home in Beni, as Mark said.

Both of these events encapsulate the challenges we continue to face on a daily basis in DRC. Just when we start to get control of the virus in one area, it appears in another. And violence and insecurity continue to undermine the response.

We are dealing with one of the world's most dangerous viruses in one of the world's most dangerous areas. Since January [2019], WHO has recorded 198 attacks on health facilities and health workers, killing 7 people including the 2 responders murdered yesterday and, in April [2019], a WHO epidemiologist, Dr Richard Mouzoko, as you remember.

Every attack sets us back. Every attack makes it more difficult to trace contacts, vaccinate, and perform safe burials. Every attack gives Ebola an opportunity to spread. Ebola gets a free ride in each and every attack.

On top of that, community mistrust, political instability, and the spread of myths and misinformation have been significant barriers. Almost 2500 people have been infected, of whom 1665 have died.

All of these challenges make this outbreak one of the most complex humanitarian emergencies any of us have ever faced, and Mark already outlined how this outbreak is different from West Africa, and even more complicated.

And yet despite the challenges, and despite the scale of the outbreak, we have so far succeeded in containing Ebola to DRC. Although the risk of spread within DRC and in the region remains very high, we should not underestimate the magnitude of what has been achieved so far. The tireless efforts of hundreds of responders from the Ministry of Health, WHO, and many partners have been nothing short of heroic. More than 161 000 people have been vaccinated, 140 000 contacts have been traced, and 71 million travelers have been screened. Let's be clear: these efforts have saved lives and prevented a much larger emergency.

Much credit goes to my brother minister Oly Ilunga, the Ministry of Health, and the government, whose transparency and daily reporting have been exceptional. Recently, we have also seen good progress on a bipartisan approach to the outbreak, which is paying dividends. Both the government and senior opposition leaders have agreed to communicate the same message to the affected communities on the need for vaccination. We're also engaging with schools, religious leaders, and business leaders to maximize community engagement and ownership.

Together with OCHA, we continue to work intensively with DRC's neighbours to invest in preparedness. More than 10 000 people have been vaccinated in Uganda, South Sudan, and Rwanda.

One of the key lessons of this outbreak is that we must fix the roof before the rains come. As the experience in Uganda demonstrates, countries that invest in preparedness will save lives and save money. About USD 18 million has been spent on preparedness in Uganda, compared with more than USD 250 million -- and counting -- on the response in DRC.

And yet the fact remains that for all our successes, we have not yet managed to end the outbreak. The risk of spread in DRC and the region remains very high. But this is more than just a health emergency, and ending it takes more than just a health response. It will take the combined efforts of the United Nations system and the international community, as Mark indicated. Which is why we welcome the secretary-general's decision in May [2019] to implement a strengthened coordination and support mechanism, led by David Gressly.

We appreciate that others are now stepping up to lend their experience and expertise to addressing the political, security, and broader humanitarian aspects of the outbreak. Now it's time for the international community to redouble its efforts, in solidarity with the people of DRC. Now is the time to demonstrate the political leadership needed to end this outbreak.

But even as we focus on ending the outbreak, we must look beyond it. An outbreak of measles in DRC has killed almost 2000 children since January [2019] -- more than Ebola in less time -- and yet it gets little international attention. Malaria, the leading cause of death in DRC, kills more than 50 000 people every year. I have traveled to North Kivu 6 times during this outbreak. Frankly, I am embarrassed to talk only about Ebola.

Together, we will end this outbreak. But unless we address its root causes -- the weak health system, the insecurity, and the political instability -- there will be another outbreak.

We often talk about the need to bridge the humanitarian-development nexus. This is the moment to practice what we preach. WHO is committed not just to ending this outbreak, but to strengthening DRC's health system so that it never comes back. That's also what the community in North Kivu is asking. To build trust, we must demonstrate that we are not simply parachuting in to deal with Ebola and then leaving once it's finished.

Finally, the identification of the case in Goma could potentially be a game-changer in this epidemic. Goma is a city of 2 million people, near the border with Rwanda, and a gateway to the region and the world. We are confident in the measures we are putting in place and hope that we will see no further transmission of Ebola in Goma.

Nevertheless, we cannot be too careful. I have therefore decided to reconvene the emergency committee as soon as possible to assess the threat of this development and advise me accordingly.

Thank you all for your support and commitment. Together, we can and must free DRC of Ebola, not just this once, but once and for all, by connecting humanitarian support with development.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall (<mjm2020@googlemail.com>)
From: "Folkers, Greg (NIH/NIAID) [E]" <gfolkers@niaid.nih.gov>

- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Analysis
[WHO, edited]
http://bit.ly/2lyHOlD

Almost a year after the outbreak of Ebola was declared in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and with the number of new cases at worrying levels, the United Nations hosted a high-level meeting today in Geneva to take stock of the coordinated response and galvanize further support for the government-led effort to defeat the deadly disease.

Yesterday, 14 Jul [2019], the 1st case of Ebola was confirmed in Goma, a city of about 1 million people south of the outbreak's epicenter. Almost 3000 health workers have so far been vaccinated against the disease in Goma. More than 1650 people have died in the current outbreak, while about 12 new cases are reported every day.

With the outbreak still confined to the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri, the response is at a critical juncture. WHO assesses the risk of spread to neighbouring provinces and countries as very high.

Chaired by the WHO director-general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, and UN under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator Mark Lowcock, today's event included the DRC minister of health, Dr Oly Ilunga, the minister for solidarity and humanitarian action, Mr Bernard Biando Sango, and the secretary of state for international development of the United Kingdom, the Rt Hon Rory Stewart, as keynote speakers.

"The 10th outbreak of Ebola is a public health crisis taking place in an environment characterized by development challenges and deficiencies in the health system," said Dr Ilunga.

"The government acknowledges how difficult it has been to get ahead of this outbreak of Ebola in our country. The response is being carried out in a very complex environment, but with support from our friends in the international community, the Congolese are committed to bringing down the number of cases to zero," said Mr Biando Sango.

"Together with the government, we can and will end this outbreak. We have better public health tools than ever to respond to Ebola, including an effective vaccine," said Dr Tedros. "But we need to see an end to the attacks and other disruptions to the response." Since January [2019], there have been 198 attacks against the health response that have resulted in 7 deaths and left 58 healthcare workers and patients injured. "We need political support from all parties, and community ownership, for the responders to do their work safely and without interruptions. This is the only way to stop the virus from continuing to spread." Dr Tedros also announced that he will reconvene the emergency committee as soon as possible to assess the latest development and advise him accordingly.

The areas of Ituri and North Kivu provinces affected by Ebola are characterised by poor infrastructure, political instability, and ongoing conflict involving scores of armed militia groups and community mistrust of national authorities and outsiders.

In May [2019], the UN secretary-general and the inter-agency humanitarian system bolstered joint UN action. This included the appointment of a UN Ebola emergency response coordinator (UN EERC), Mr David Gressly, who is based in the affected areas to ensure an enabling environment for the public health response, including appropriate security, logistics, political and community engagement, and action to address the concerns of affected communities.

"Today, donors and responders expressed confidence in the approach we are now taking," said Mr Lowcock. "Unless we get substantially more financial resources immediately, it will not be possible to end the outbreak. Every delay gives the virus an opportunity to spread, which has disastrous consequences. We need to do everything possible now to avoid reaching the scale of the outbreak we saw in West Africa 5 years ago when more than 10 000 lives were lost before a multi-billion-dollar response brought the cases down to zero."

Speaking on the role of the international community, Rory Stewart, said: "We are on the edge with this crisis. My visit to eastern DRC this month [July 2019] only reinforced my view about just how urgent our response to this crisis must be. This is very, very real. We are essentially chasing Ebola -- one of the world's most deadly diseases -- around an area overrun by armed groups. We need the international community to step up and stop this outbreak from escalating. There is a real danger that, if we lose control of it, this disease could spread beyond DRC's borders to the wider region."

UN EERC Gressly, WHO's assistant director-general for emergency response, Dr Ibrahima Soce Fall, and the president of the DRC Ebola Survivors' Association, Dr Maurice Kakule, joined the event from eastern DRC via video-conference. Ms Annette Dixon, World Bank Group vice president for human development, also participated via video-conference from Washington, DC.

"We need to substantially improve our readiness and surveillance mechanisms so that we are getting ahead of the virus instead of chasing the virus. There is no room for complacency. It is not over until the transmission is broken in all affected areas," UN EERC Gressly said from Goma.

UNICEF deputy executive director Dr Omar Abdi spoke about community engagement, and the secretary general of the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Mr Elhadj As Sy, spoke on preparedness in the DRC and in neighbouring countries. Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO regional director for Africa, also addressed preparedness. A representative from Medair, Dr Trina Helderman, discussed the critical role that NGOs are playing in the response.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall (<mjm2020@googlemail.com>)
From: "Folkers, Greg (NIH/NIAID) [E]" <gfolkers@niaid.nih.gov>

******
[3] Goma pastor
- Tue 16 Jul 2019. Death of pastor
[News24, abridged, edited]
https://www.news24.com/Africa/News/first-ebola-patient-has-died-in-dr-congo-city-governor-20190716

The 1st patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in the eastern DR Congo city of Goma has died, the governor of North Kivu province said on Tuesday [16 Jul 2019]. The case -- the 1st in a major urban hub in the region's nearly year-old epidemic of the disease -- has sparked deep concern in neighbouring Rwanda and at the UN. "Unfortunately, I can confirm that the patient died," governor Carly Nzanzu told reporters.

The patient has been described as an evangelical preacher who had travelled from Goma to Butembo, one of the towns hardest hit by the outbreak. While there, he preached at 7 churches and regularly touched worshippers, including the sick, before taking the bus back to Goma last Friday [12 Jul 2019], the health ministry said.

On his return on Sunday [14 Jul 2019], he went to a clinic with a fever, was diagnosed with Ebola and sent back to Butembo, which is better geared than Goma for treating the disease, it said. "He died during transfer by road," Nzanzu said.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall <mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[The travel between Goma and Butembo would have to be hard on someone seriously ill with Ebola. It is not really clear why this transfer was attempted, but our condolences go out to the family of the pastor. - Mod.LK]

- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Contact tracing
[Herald Bulletin, abridged, edited]
https://tinyurl.com/y2oj2dl8

During his trip to Goma, the 46 year old preacher managed to pass along the way 3 different health checkpoints, aimed at stopping those who are sick with Ebola and highly contagious. Now health authorities along his route are trying to hunt down all those he may have been in contact with.

It's a crucial task to contain the spread of Ebola in Goma, home to more than 2 million people and the largest city to confirm a case of the disease since the epidemic here began nearly a year ago.

"It's the door of this region to the rest of the world," said Dr Harouna Djingarey, infectious disease program manager for WHO's regional office in eastern Congo. "From here you can fly to go to everywhere in the world. If we don't have the control over the contacts, some high-risk contacts may fly, take a plane and go somewhere."

Health experts have long feared that the disease responsible for killing nearly 1700 people so far since August [2018] would make its way eventually to Goma. The city is an important transit point for the region and beyond, and also a bustling trade hub drawing travelers from throughout the east.

Congo's health ministry sought to reassure people late Sunday [14 Jul 2019] that the situation was under control, though some already were on edge after learning about the sick pastor. "God help us if Ebola is now in Goma," said [BR], 30, who immediately feared the case could prompt restrictions against her and fellow residents. "My children are now on alert that they can't greet or play with others. They are washing their hands all the time."

The health ministry said that the pastor had preached at 7 different churches during his evangelical trip to Butembo, one of the towns hardest hit by Ebola in Congo. Last Tuesday [9 Jul 2019], the preacher fell ill and was seen at home by a nurse before he began his bus trip to Goma. Somehow he was able to evade detection during the roadside health checkpoints, when all travelers get off the bus, wash their hands, and have their temperature taken. "During the checks, he did not seem to show signs of the disease. In addition, at each checkpoint he wrote different names and surnames on the lists of travelers, probably indicating his desire to hide his identity and state of health," the ministry said.

Upon arrival in Goma he sought medical treatment, and health workers there immediately suspected he had Ebola, which was later confirmed by a lab test. The man remains in an Ebola treatment center in Goma, while authorities try to reconstruct his route.

Congolese health officials have been preparing for months for the possibility a case would emerge in Goma, and as a result, more than 3000 frontline health workers already have been vaccinated. Neighboring Rwanda also has taken measures to stop the disease's spread across its border as well.

[byline: Krista Larson]

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall <mjm2020@googlemail.com>
From: "Folkers, Greg (NIH/NIAID) [E]" <gfolkers@niaid.nih.gov>

[According to an update of this report, WHO's Dr Michael Ryan, who is directing the agency's Ebola response, said 30 contacts in the Goma case had already been vaccinated and the remaining 30 would be vaccinated on Tuesday [16 Jul 2019].

The pastor was transferred back to Butembo on Monday [15 Jul 2019] in accordance with a decision by Congo's Ministry of Health, according to Doctors Without Borders, which runs the Ebola clinic in Goma where he was diagnosed. (Note that the pastor died during transport.)

WHO and partners have also said the response has been hampered by a lack of resources, repeatedly citing a USD 50 million gap in its Ebola containment plan. "Unless there's a big scale-up in the (funding) response, we're unlikely to be successful in getting to zero cases," UN emergency relief coordinator Mark Lowcock said.

On Monday [15 Jul 2019], Rory Stewart, Britain's secretary of state for international development, announced the UK would donate another USD 63 million to help stop the outbreak. He also called for other G7 countries to increase their support, specifically Francophone countries.

If people refuse to follow directives from those trying to control virus spread, this outbreak is likely to simmer along with the threat of explosion for a very long time. - Mod.LK]

- Tue 16 Jul 2019. Rwanda
[provinces26rdc.net, in French, machine trans., edited]
https://www.provinces26rdc.net/ebola-le-rwanda-demande-deviter-les-voyages-au-congo/

The Rwandan Ministry of Health on Monday [15 Jul 2019] urged its nationals to avoid any trip to eastern DRC after the discovery of an Ebola case in Goma, a city close to the border between the 2 countries. This case was discovered in Goma, a city of one million people separated by the border of the city of Gisenyi, in western Rwanda. The crossing of the border between Goma and Gisenyi is one of the most used in the region: Thousands of people use it every day. Although no Ebola case has been reported in Rwanda, it is vital that Rwandans take action to help prevent the spread of Ebola, the ministry said.

"The Ministry of Health reminds citizens and residents not to cross the border for unnecessary travel to areas in neighboring countries where Ebola cases have been reported," stressed the ministry. And to add: "We recommend that our citizens and residents not provide accommodation to travelers who come from areas of neighboring countries where Ebola has been reported."

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[Goma presents a major risk as a busy transportation hub, with both national as well as international travel. - Mod.LK]

- Tue 16 Jul 2019. Helen Branswell
https://twitter.com/HelenBranswell

Further details on the pastor:

Helen Branswell
4. The priest's mother & sister live in South Kivu, a province which hasn't had Ebola cases; they were with him in the days leading up to his illness. They returned to their home, near the Rwandan border. The priest died from his infection. Potential here for bad developments.

3. It seems the discovery of an Ebola case in Goma may not have been as neat as was previously thought. The bus the priest traveled on broke down. He took a motorbike to Goma; the driver hasn't been found. The priest may have been symptomatic earlier than first believed.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[This complicates contact tracing. We have to wait and see while those on the ground try to find all individuals who may have been exposed to the pastor while he was infectious. - Mod.LK]

******
[4] Opinions
- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Challenges
[Washington Post from Kaiser Daily Global Health Policy Report, abridged, edited]
https://tinyurl.com/y4uatlde
[byline: Max Bearak]

Health workers worry that some cases -- if not whole transmission chains -- are in places that are inaccessible because of poor infrastructure or insecurity, making the extent of the outbreak hard to fully measure. The area where the outbreak is taking place is also home to one of Congo's most protracted and violent conflicts -- a patchwork of ethnic militias, vigilantes and government-aligned forces.

Fighting has at times targeted the Ebola response, hampering it and leading to spurts of new cases. Near the outbreak's epicenter in the city of Beni on Monday [15 Jul 2019], 2 health workers were killed by unknown assailants. Tedros Ghebreyesus, the WHO director-general, said there have been almost 200 attacks on health workers, killing 7, since January [2019].

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall (<mjm2020@googlemail.com>)
From: "Folkers, Greg (NIH/NIAID) [E]" <gfolkers@niaid.nih.gov>

- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Johnson & Johnson vaccine
[Science, abridged, edited]
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/07/first-ebola-case-african-border-metropolis-could-be-game-changer-who-leader-warns
[byline: Meredith Wadman]

Many public health experts had argued for the introduction of a 2nd, still-experimental Ebola vaccine, made by Johnson & Johnson (J&J) of New Brunswick, NJ; its use was discussed during an international meeting in Kinshasa on 28 and 29 [Jun 2019]. But on 12 Jul [2019], DRC health minister Oly Ilunga Kalenga announced the government would not allow the use of the J&J vaccine or any others. He cited "a lack of sufficient scientific evidence on the efficacy and safety of other vaccines, and the risk of confusing the population", which is already very distrustful of the health workers fighting Ebola and is inundated by false rumors about the epidemic.

Unlike the Merck vaccine, which was shown to work well during the West African epidemic, the J&J vaccine has not been tested for efficacy in people potentially exposed to Ebola. But the vaccine, which consists of 2 different shots given 56 days apart, has been found safe in phase I and II studies involving more than 6000 healthy volunteers, generates robust antibody responses, and has protected nonhuman primates exposed to Ebola, Peter Piot, director of the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) said in a statement today [15 Jul 2019]. (LSHTM is participating in a study of the vaccine in multiple African countries.)

The Merck vaccine has been administered to some 161 000 people in the DRC, including 3000 health workers in Goma. Merck says it has an additional 245 000 vaccine doses ready to ship, and capacity to produce another 900 000 over the coming 6 months to 18 months. But experts worry that's not enough. "We are very concerned that supplies of the Merck vaccine currently being used will run out before this epidemic ends, which would have devastating consequences," Josie Golding, epidemics lead at the Wellcome Trust in London, said in a statement delivered at today's [15 Jul 2019] high-level meeting. "There is an urgent need to deploy a 2nd vaccine," she said. "We regret the recent announcement against the use of the J&J vaccine and ask for this to be reconsidered. Lives ... depend on it."

Piot agrees. "It is hard to understand why such a decision was taken, going so far as to ban any research on investigational Ebola vaccines in the country during this outbreak," he said in his statement. "The DRC has been a leader in innovation during Ebola outbreaks, and should remain at the forefront of research and innovation in this area."

"We respect the decision of the DRC minister of health regarding Ebola vaccine studies in the country," Paul Stoffels, J&J's chief scientific officer, said in a statement today [15 Jul 2019]. "We remain ready to mobilize our resources if we are called on to help with outbreak response efforts." The company says it has enough vaccine stockpiled to vaccinate some 1.5 million people.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Regarding PHEIC declaration, other neglected diseases, and J&J vaccine
[The New York Times, abridged, edited]
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/15/health/ebola-congo-outbreak.html?action =click&module=News&pgtype=Homepage
[byline: Denise Grady]

Because of the Goma case, Dr Tedros said he would once again convene a WHO committee to decide whether it is time to declare the epidemic a "public health emergency of international concern", which could draw more international help to the region. This would be the 4th meeting of the committee, which has declined 3 times to declare an emergency and has drawn sharp criticism from many public health experts.

The last refusal to declare an international emergency occurred even after the disease had reached Uganda, where there were 3 cases in people who had crossed the border from Congo. Uganda has experience with Ebola and containment measures, and no more cases have been detected there. South Sudan, which also borders Congo, is considered far less capable of controlling an outbreak, and there is great concern about the possibility of the disease spreading there.

A major argument against declaring an emergency is that it could lead to restrictions on travel and trade that could harm countries in the region and hamstring efforts to get more people and supplies into epidemic zones. There is also resentment over all the attention given to Ebola when the impoverished region has other severe health problems, like a measles outbreak that has killed 2000 children, as well as cholera outbreaks, endemic malaria and high rates of women dying from childbirth.

Dr Tedros said people in the street in Congo have asked him, "'Are you here to help us, or to prevent this thing from coming to you? Are you doing this for us, or for yourself?' It embarrasses me." He said people in the region needed to be reassured that the international assistance would stay long after Ebola was gone. "We should not appear to be seen as if we are parachuting in and out because of Ebola," he said.

[Regarding J&J vaccine and funding:] "We need to close the debate," said Congo's health minister, Dr Oly Ilunga. "We have a vaccine that is highly effective, accepted by the population after a period of mistrust." He added: "We don't want contradictory messages going out, or contradictory schemes. We have an effective weapon. Let's focus on that." Dr Ilunga also urged the participants at the UN meeting to refrain from talking too much about money, because perceptions that the response was bringing cash into the region had led to "rare cases of hostages being taken". He said, "Let's not talk about figures too much, to not put the teams on the ground in danger."

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

- Mon 15 Jul 2019. Peter Piot statement
[London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, edited]
https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/newsevents/news/2019/statement-ebola-epidemic-democratic-republic-congo-professor-peter-piot

"As we approach the one-year mark of the world's 2nd largest-ever Ebola outbreak -- with nearly 2500 cases and more than 1600 deaths in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) -- there is no evidence that the end of this devastating epidemic is in sight. Rather, there is a real risk that this epidemic could further expand, as illustrated by the recent case of a pastor with Ebola disease traveling from Butembo to the major border city of Goma, alongside the ever-present risk of another Ebola outbreak emerging in the DRC or elsewhere.

"We at LSHTM commend the major efforts of all local, national, and international actors who are tirelessly working to save lives in North Kivu and Ituri. While these efforts have certainly helped slow the disease's spread, a change in strategy and intensified efforts are urgently needed. From stronger community engagement, to strengthened diagnosis and real time sequencing, to ring vaccination and primary prevention through broader vaccination in the community -- we must use every possible approach. This is why we very much regret the recent decision of the DRC minister of health to rule out the deployment of a 2nd vaccine.

"It is hard to understand why such a decision was taken, going so far as to ban any research on investigational Ebola vaccines in the country during this outbreak. The DRC has been a leader in innovation during Ebola outbreaks, and should remain at the forefront of research and innovation in this area. Whereas it is imperative to intensify the current ring vaccination strategy with the experimental Merck vaccine, it is clear that, up to now, this strategy has not been able to stop the epidemic. Deployment under study conditions of a 2nd experimental vaccine would have the dual-benefit of supporting the ongoing response and improving preparedness for future outbreaks.

"The Johnson & Johnson (J&J) investigational Ebola vaccine regimen has been tested in more than 6000 persons and is safe. Although it has not been used in previous outbreaks, and thus demonstration of efficacy in humans is lacking, it has shown outstanding safety and immunogenicity in humans and is highly protective against Ebola challenge in non-human primates. In line with the recommendations of the WHO SAGE Committee, a consortium including LSHTM is ready to work with local and national authorities in DRC, together with our Congolese and international partners, to deploy up to 1.5 million J&J vaccine regimens to test the vaccine, support the ongoing response, and bring an additional tool into the armamentarium against Ebola.

"We urge national and international actors to significantly increase support to contain this devastating Ebola epidemic, while ensuring the funding reaches those in need and contributes to work at the community level, which is vital in the face of such a complex epidemic. LSHTM will continue to support epidemic control efforts and to strengthen preparedness for future epidemics, including the coordinated deployment of both the Merck and J&J vaccine, and trust the Minister's decision be reconsidered.

"This is a critical juncture in the Ebola response. Let us join forces to intensify current efforts and employ all of the tools and approaches at our disposal. There is no easy solution to this incredibly complex outbreak. We hope that today's high-level meeting convened by WHO and the United Nations is a catalyst for improved coordination, high-level political support, and urgent unified action."

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall (<mjm2020@googlemail.com>)
From: "Folkers, Greg (NIH/NIAID) [E]" <gfolkers@niaid.nih.gov>

- Tue 16 Jul 2019. Editorial: Holding back Ebola
[British Medical Journal, abridged, edited]
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l4566

Citation: Jephcott FL. Holding back Ebola -- domestic public health infrastructure is the best defence. BMJ 2019;366:l4566. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l4566

Current challenges
---------------
Ebola outbreaks tend to be driven by "superspreaders": individuals who generate a disproportionate number of secondary cases (3,4). This means that missing just 1 or 2 could bring about a surge of new cases. The growing number of infections among healthcare workers, a known source of superspreaders, adds to the precariousness of the current situation (2).

Important gaps are still apparent in core surveillance activities, including in contact tracing. Effective contact tracing works by identifying and liaising with people known to have been in contact with someone with Ebola while they were still infectious. If one of these contacts then develops symptoms indicative of Ebola, they can be swiftly isolated and tested before anyone else becomes infected. Ideally, all new cases should occur in known contacts, but at present the figure is around 55% (5). The gap seems to be due to a mix of administrative errors, inadequate listing of contacts when new cases are identified, and, most concerning, cases arising from undocumented chains of transmission. In a recent press conference, the World Health Organization executive director for health emergencies estimated that up to a quarter of new cases might be being missed (6).

Underlying the troubled response is the volatile and poverty-stricken setting of northeastern DRC. Armed groups hamper containment efforts by restricting the movement of Ebola response teams and by displacing already mobile at-risk populations. Since early June [2019] some 300  000 people have been displaced from the affected Ituri province (7). A recent rise in attacks targeting response workers has further hindered containment efforts (8). Ebola interventions are effective only with the willing participation of the relevant community, and at present this vital element is lacking (9).

Preventive action
----------------
Setting aside the security issues in eastern DRC, the question of what can be done to prevent future outbreaks getting to this point needs an answer. Since it is impossible to predict exactly where in west or central Africa the next outbreak will surface, the solution seems to be to lift the levels of primary healthcare and basic public health infrastructure across most of the continent.

The 1st few cases of the next outbreak, critical to early containment, are unlikely to be fielded by a dedicated Ebola response team (10,11). The outbreak will emerge as a person, or small cluster of people, developing symptoms indistinguishable from those of far more common infectious diseases (12). Whether the outbreak stops there or escalates into a large epidemic will, in part, depend on whether those infected have access to a healthcare facility with the rudimentary diagnostic tests needed to quickly rule out common diseases and basic protective equipment such as gloves and disinfectant (13). Of potentially greater importance, though, will be the presence of well-resourced local public health officers, especially at the district level. These are the people best placed to raise the alarm and initiate the cheap, low tech interventions effective against Ebola -- quarantines, safe supervised burials, and community engagement.

The current outbreak is probably beyond the domestic capabilities of the DRC. It would be a mistake, however, to take from this that large-scale international responses are the solution to the problem of Ebola outbreaks. As is the case with so many other infectious diseases, the likelihood of a large Ebola outbreak would be greatly reduced by ensuring a basic level of domestic public health infrastructure across west and central Africa. It is no coincidence that the countries where the largest Ebola outbreaks have proliferated are among those most in want of soap and local public health officials (14,15).

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[See publication for full article and references.

This is an important and insightful editorial on how best to manage Ebola outbreaks. It is absolutely true that strong public health infrastructure will always provide the best defense against outbreaks of Ebola and other important diseases such as malaria, cholera, measles, TB, and more. However, it is incumbent on the community to take advantage of the facilities and expertise that exists, and this takes education and trust. No matter how well equipped are the facilities and how well prepared are the healthcare workers, sick individuals must present themselves to the clinics to be cared for. In some locations, that may be harder to develop than a strong public health infrastructure. For example, a modelling study suggested that 3% of people with Ebola infected more than 60% of all cases during the 2014-2015 West African epidemic. These "superspreaders" -- the very old or very young, who stayed at home rather than attend a treatment centre -- fuelled the outbreak's growth and prolonged its duration. (see Lau MSY, Dalziel BD, Funk S, et al. Spatial and temporal dynamics of superspreading events in the 2014-2015 West Africa Ebola epidemic. PNAS 2017;114(9):2337-42. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1614595114).

Nonetheless, a goal of access by everyone to clean running water and soap would be a great start. - Mod.LK

Maps of Congo DR: http://goo.gl/DM2AT8 and https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6571650,33045]
See Also
Ebola update (66): Congo DR (NK,IT) case update, Goma, media advisory 20190715.6568141
Ebola update (65): Congo DR (NK, IT) case update, summaries, opinion 20190713.6566907
Ebola update (64): Congo DR (NK,IT) update, WHO, summaries, challenges, vaccines 20190712.6565357
Ebola update (63): Congo DR (NK, IT) case update, summaries 20190706.6555278
Ebola update (62): Congo DR (NK, IT) case update, summaries, education 20190703.6550730
Ebola update (61): Congo DR (NK,IT) case update, summaries, leadership, response 20190629.6543844
Ebola update (60): Congo DR (NK, IT) case update, WHO, summaries, response 20190627.6540134
Ebola update (59): Congo DR (NK,IT) case update, summaries, WHO, vaccine 20190625.6536477
Ebola update (58): Congo DR (NK, IT) case update, summaries, spread, treatment 20190620.6530882
Ebola update (57): Congo DR (NK,IT) case updates, summary, borders, research 20190618.6525334
Ebola update (56): Congo DR (NK,IT) updates, no PHEIC, Merck vaccine, Africa CDC 20190615.6521868
Ebola update (55): Congo DR (NK,IT) Uganda (KS) ex DRC, case updates, summaries 20190614.6519943
Ebola update (54): Congo DR (NK,IT) Uganda (KS) ex DRC, case updates, summaries 20190613.6517597
Ebola update (53): Uganda (KS) ex Congo DR (NK) 1st cross-border cases, MOH, WHO 20190612.6516605
Ebola update (52): Congo DR (NK, IT), new UN emergency Ebola coordinator 20190609.6511167
Ebola update (51): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, support, response 20190606.6507016
Ebola update (50): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, preparedness, response, vaccine 20190603.6501486
Ebola update (49): Congo DR (NK,IT) cases, WHO, response 20190531.6494013
Ebola update (48): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, WHO, response 20190525.6486623
Ebola update (47): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, situation, research 20190520.6476709
Ebola update (46): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, response 20190515.6470579
Ebola update (45): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summaries, WHO, risk, response 20190512.6465801
Ebola update (44): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, WHO, response, vaccine, research 20190509.6461476
Ebola update (43): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, WHO, preparedness, response 20190506.6457148
Ebola update (42): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, WHO, Uganda, vaccine 20190503.6453732
Ebola update (41): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, WHO 20190428.6445655
Ebola update (40): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, response, vaccine, crisis 20190425.6438898
Ebola update (30): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summaries, WHO, preparedness 20190321.6378400
Ebola update (20): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summary, vaccine, response 20190221.6328121
Ebola update (10): Zaire ebolavirus detected, greater long-fingered bat, Liberia 20190124.6275982
Ebola update (01): Congo DR (NK, IT) cases, summaries, Uganda 20190103.6241326
.................................................lk/tw/rd/sh
</body>
