<header id=009889>
Published Date: 2011-12-21 03:22:06 EST
Subject: PRO/AH> Schmallenberg virus - Europe (04): (Netherlands) risk profile
Archive Number: 20111221.3645
</header>
<body id=009889>
SCHMALLENBERG VIRUS - EUROPE (04): (NETHERLANDS) RISK PROFILE
****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[On 19 Nov 2011, ProMED-mail published a report, submitted by the
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Riems, Germany, notifying the
discovery of a new orthobunyavirus suspected to be related to a
clinical syndrome in Germany and the Netherlands. Metagenomic analysis
of pooled samples from affected animals identified sequences which
reportedly were related to genomic sequences of Shamonda-, Aino- and
Akabane-virus, viruses which are mainly transmitted by _Culicoides_
spp., belonging to the Simbu group of the genus orthobunyavirus. The
virus, yet to be isolated, was provisionally named as
"Schmallenberg-virus," according to the location in Germany where the
samples originated.

On 17 Dec 2011, ProMED-mail published an official notification of the
Dutch Minister of health reporting the appearance of several cases of
congenital malformations in lambs throughout the country, the cause of
which was suspected (but yet to be finally confirmed) to be the same
Schmallenberg-virus. The minister indicated that according to an
initial risk assessment performed by RIVM, "the risk to human health
is regarded to be low."

The mentioned "initial risk assessment" report is richly referenced
and includes the following sections: 1. Situation assessment; 2.
Taxonomy; 3. Transmission cycle; 4. Reservoirs; 5. Vectors; 6.
Clinical manifestation of orthobunyaviruses in human; 7. Human
diagnostics; 8. Risk factors for human exposure; 9.
Conclusion/recommendations.

Sections 1, 6, 8 and 9 are copied for the convenience of our
subscribers. - Mod.AS]

Date: 17 Dec 2011
Source: Web-site, Note, National institute of public health and the
environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands [edited]
http://www.rivm.nl/dsresource?objectid=rivmp:60483&type=org&disposition=inline.


Risk Profile Human Schmallenberg virus
-------------------------------------
1. Situation assessment
--------------------
On 18 Nov 2011, scientists from the Friedrich Loeffler institute in
Germany identified the presence of viral sequences in serum from
cattle affected by a specific febrile syndrome. The sequences show
homology to the L, M, and S gene segments of viruses from the family
Bunyaviridae, genus Orthobunyavirus. Full details of the virus
characterization are needed before definitive conclusions can be drawn
about the taxonomic assignment. However, based on the preliminary
data, the virus -- named Schmallenberg virus -- is most related to
genomic sequences of Shamonda-, Aino-, and Akabane-virus, all grouped
within the Simbu serogroup and known as viruses that may cause illness
in ruminants.

Based on the findings so far, the infection is considered to be the
likely cause of a clinical syndrome that occurred in late summer in
cattle (fever, decreased milk production, diarrhea) in Germany and the
Netherlands, and more recently in sheep in The Netherlands
(intra-uterine malformations). Evidence for association of the virus
with the illness in cattle and sheep in the Netherlands comes from the
detection of viral gene sequences by RT-PCR in a significant
proportion of sera from cattle with the syndrome, while 150 sera from
healthy cattle were negative. Furthermore, the virus was detected in
brain material from lambs with congenital abnormalities (Communicated
by Beer, Freidrich Loeffler institute, Van der Poel, CVI [Central
Veterinary Institute, NL] , Vellema, Kock, Mars GD [Animal Health
Service, NL]).

So far, Schmallenberg virus has been identified in the North
Rhine-Westphalia (Germany) and the Netherlands. Based on an initial
assessment of the clinical syndrome in the Netherlands, the infection
appears to be dispersed across the country with no apparent geographic
clustering.

As the family Bunyaviridae contains several medically important
viruses, a risk assessment was made to identify potential human health
risks.

6. Clinical manifestation of orthobunyaviruses in human
----------------------------------
Currently, Schmallenberg virus has not been related to human disease.
Shamonda-, Aino-, and Akabane-virus, which are genetically most
related to the Schmallenberg virus, are only found in livestock.
However, the zoonotic potential of this virus cannot be excluded as:

1) Viruses within the Simbu serogroup (Oropouche virus and Iquitos
virus) are known to be zoonotic and cause human outbreaks.

2) Genetic reassortment among members of the same serogroup within the
Orthobunyavirus genus occurs in nature and has led to the emergence of
new viruses, occasionally with increased pathogenicity. This may
increase the zoonotic potential of these viruses, as reassortment
might lead to change of host reservoirs.

3) Viruses within other serogroups of the genus orthobunya are
zoonotic. Examples: California encephalitis virus, La Crosse
encephalitis virus, Tahyna virus, Bataivirus, Inkoovirus, Snowshoe
hare virus.

Oropouche virus, like Schmallenberg virus, is a member of the Simbu
serogroup, causes a febrile disease often associated with headache,
dizziness, photophobia, skin rash, myalgias, arthralgias and malaise,
which may be long lasting and sometimes relapsing 2-3 weeks after
initial onset of symptoms (18). Patients with Oropouche fever usually
recover after 2-3 weeks of disease without known sequelae or recorded
mortality. The very limited information available indicates that
Oropouche virus infection is associated with viremia that declines
quickly until the 5th or 6th days of illness and that the virus has
been recovered from the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) in association
with clinical meningitis.

Iquitos virus, a member of the Simbu serogroup to which Schmallenberg
virus belongs, causes illness that includes symptoms of fever, general
malaise, headache, retro-orbital pain, myalgia, arthralgias and
chills. Respiratory manifestations were observed in 38 percent of the
cases and gastrointestinal manifestations in 75 percent of the cases,
including diarrhea, vomiting, nausea.

There have been no reports of unusual human illness from the regions
where Schmallenberg virus has been identified. The veterinary health
service indicates that farmers from affected farms have been
specifically asked for symptoms of illness and have reported none.

9. Conclusion/recommendations.
---------------------------
1) Based on the considerations mentioned above, zoonotic transmission
of Schmallenberg-virus cannot be excluded but is considered unlikely.

2) The clinical syndrome associated with Schmallenberg virus in cattle
peaked during the months August and September 2011. Currently, the
circulation/transmission of Schmallenberg virus in cattle seems to
have faded out. The recent increase in delivery of malformed lambs --
if proven to be related to the infection -- is likely resulting from
intra-uterine exposure during prior months.

3) If one would assume that Schmallenberg virus has zoonotic
potential, there is no acute risk for the human population at present
(December 2011) when considering the vectorial transmission route
(most likely midges). However, exposure risk during abortion or
delivery of affected ruminants due to Schmallenberg virus is unknown.

4) There have been no reports of unusual illness in humans in the
months when the cattle syndrome peaked.

5) The outbreak in cattle in Germany and the Netherlands could reoccur
in the vector season in 2012 (based on epidemiology of other
orthobunyaviruses and bluetongue virus, and survival in midges during
winter). In this case, these outbreaks should be monitored closely
from a public health perspective, and an increased awareness for
putative zoonotic events is indicated, for instance by implementation
of a surveillance system.

6) We advise the initiation of a monitoring system for diseases among
professionals (farmers, veterinarians) that have been in close contact
with abortion products or who conducted deliveries of affected
calves/lambs. They will be advised to contact the local municipal
health services. The national center for control of infectious
diseases (LCI) will coordinate this system.

7) Currently, diagnostic methods for this virus are limited to RT-PCR
and have not been validated. Improved diagnostic methods will be
developed in the near future. The CIB is in contact with the FLI and
CVI to prepare for laboratory response in case such is needed.

[Prepared by: Chantal Reusken and Marion Koopmans National Institute
of Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands with
input from: Marieta Braks, Kitty Maassen, Hans van den Kerkhof and
Roel Coutinho (RIVM). Petra Kock, (GD) Wim van der Poel, Johan Bongers
(CVI) Rudy van Meiswinkel, (Culicoides expert) Ab Osterhaus (Erasmus
MC) Menno de Jong (UVA, AMC) Martin Beer (FLI, Germany) Toos
Waegemaekers (RIVM/GGD)]

--
Communicated by:
Sabine Zentis
Gut Laach
52385 Nideggen, Germany
<CVLonghorns@aol.com>

[For the full text of this commendable report and for the references,
subscribers are referred to the source URL.

During recent years, several introductions of arboviruses into Europe
have been reported. One of them, namely BTV-8, involved large parts of
western Europe, starting (why?!) in the same geographic realm as the
current Schmallenberg virus. The experience gathered during the
handling of BTV-8 will help the European animal-health authorities in
the planning and early performance of epidemiological investigations
and control schemes if and when the role of this virus as an animal
pathogen is finally confirmed. In case confirmed, it will be
interesting to note whether Germany and the Netherlands regard it as
an emerging disease. In case affirmative, official notification is
due.

Vaccination against Akabane disease has been applied in several
counties (e.g. Japan and Australia). Akabane disease is not included
in OIE's list; no official data on its situation in OIE member states
are available.

One of the outcomes of the BTV-8 episode was the conclusion that
culicoides-borne diseases, which are not likely to be transmitted
directly between mammals, are not to be controlled by a stamping-out
policy but rather by vaccination combined with zoning. The details of
any control schemes will also require an answer to a crucial question:
Is the Schmallenberg virus zoonotic? The cited risk assessment
provides a plausible roadmap to tackle this question.

Some subscribers have mentioned the absence of another
orthobunyavirus, Cache valley virus (CCV), in the recent Dutch and
German reports/discussions. CCV is known as the causative agent of
congenital malformations in ruminants in the American continent and,
reportedly, has infected humans in Argentina (2004-5). This
mosquito-borne virus has probably been excluded from the report's
considerations due to the fact that it is not included in the relevant
Simbu group.

On 20 Dec 2011, the Dutch Minister of Agriculture declared
Schmallenberg virus reportable, namely requiring that animal holders
will notify to the Veterinary Services any case of a malformed-born
calf, lamb or kid. See press release (in Dutch) at
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/nieuws/2011/12/20/staatssecretaris-bleker-stelt
-meldplicht-in-voor-schmallenbergvirus.html.
- Mod.AS]
See Also
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (03): (Netherlands) cong. mal., ovine, bovine 20111217.3621
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands (03): update, RFI 20111201.3498
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands (03): update, RFI 20111125.3451
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands (02): new virus
susp. 20111119.3404
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands: RFI 20111115.3371

Cache Valley virus, ovine - USA: (ND) 20110115.0177
2003
----
Akabane disease, bovines - Australia (NSW) (02) 20030714.1735
Akabane disease, bovines - Australia (NSW) 20030630.1611
.................................................arn/msp/lm
</body>
