<header id=015429>
Published Date: 2017-08-13 15:54:49 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Potomac horse fever, equine - USA: (KY)
Archive Number: 20170813.5247748
</header>
<body id=015429>
POTOMAC HORSE FEVER, EQUINE - USA: (KENTUCKY)
*********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 12 Aug 2017
Source: The Horse [edited]
http://www.thehorse.com/articles/39544/cluster-of-potomac-horse-fever-cases-confirmed-in-kentucky


Horses can be exposed to the Potomac horse fever (PHF) causative agent by inadvertently ingesting aquatic insects infected with flukes carrying the bacteria or by drinking flukes directly from rivers or streams.

Veterinarians in Central Kentucky have confirmed nearly 30 cases of PHF in area horses so far in 2017. At press time, 6 have been diagnosed since the beginning of August [2017].

The University of Kentucky Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory's (UKVDL) Equine Disease Maps indicate 4 cases were diagnosed in May [2017], 9 in June, and 9 more in July, for a total of 28 cases at press time. Most of the affected horses have been from Fayette County, with other cases being confirmed in horses from Woodford, Bourbon, Harrison, Scott, and Taylor counties.

In addition to performing PCR diagnostic testing on samples from live horses, Dr Jacqueline Smith, UKVDL epidemiologist and founder of the UKVDL Disease Mapping Initiative, said the laboratory has conducted 2 necropsies confirming PHF.

"Typically June, July, and August are the months for the most cases of PHF, yet it can be seen throughout the spring, summer, and fall," Smith said. "We average 7 cases per month during the summer for PCR testing and average 1 to 2 per summer month in necropsy."

Dr Bryan Waldridge of Park Equine Hospital at Woodford, in Versailles, Kentucky, who has treated many PHF cases over the years, agrees, and said he expects additional cases to be confirmed throughout August.

Keeping this in mind, area owners are encouraged to watch their horses closely for signs of disease and alert veterinarians of suspicious signs as soon as possible. Smith said PHF's fatality rate ranges from 5 to 30 percent, and horses treated early in the course of disease might have a better chance of surviving.

Horses don't have to live near water to contract PHF. Barn lights can attract flies, which then get into horses' water buckets, feed troughs, and hay, and subsequently into the horse.

Potomac horse fever is caused by _Neorickettsia risticii_, an organism found in some flukes (a wormlike parasite) that infect aquatic snails and insects (such as caddisflies and mayflies). Horses can be exposed by inadvertently ingesting aquatic insects infected with flukes carrying the bacteria or by drinking flukes directly from rivers or streams. However, even horses residing far from water bodies aren't out of PHF's reach.

"I've seen this in racehorses, and there was a report of Potomac at a Minnesota show barn, as well," Waldridge said of horses contracting PHF without residing near natural water sources. "Pole lights (near barns) or big lights on the barn will attract the flies. The flies can then get into horses' water buckets, feed troughs, and hay, and the horses can consume them that way."

"I've seen (PHF) on farms where the horses never drink water that doesn't come out of a spigot, and the farm I'm thinking of had the worst Potomac I've ever seen," he added.

Also complicating diagnosis is the fact that PHF has been known to yield highly variable clinical signs. Smith said signs owners should watch for include acute onset fever, depression, decreased appetite, mild colic-like signs, watery diarrhea, edema (fluid swelling), and, later in the course of disease, acute laminitis.

However, not all affected horses develop all these signs.

"The signs are so vague," Waldridge said. "The 2 you hear about most are fever and going off feed -- those are usually the first things you see."

However, he said he's already had a case this year in which the horse never developed a fever. And in the past, he's had cases that have never had diarrhea.

Many owners go to great lengths to protect their horses from contracting this potentially deadly disease. One option is vaccination with one of the inactivated whole-cell vaccines on the market.

"Although vaccination has been reported to protect 78 percent of experimentally infected ponies, it has been marginally protective in the field," said Dr. Smith. "Vaccine failure has been attributed to antigenic and genomic heterogeneity among the more than 14 different strains isolated from naturally occurring cases.

"Furthermore, vaccine failure may also be due to lack of antibody protection at the site of exposure, because the natural route of transmission has been determined to be oral ingestion of the agent," she added.

While some veterinarians recommend vaccinating, Dr. Waldridge said it's not one of his go-to products.

"I don't routinely recommend it," he said. "I've seen horses on farms where the owners vaccinate, and those horses still get sick."

Like Smith, he said it comes down the bacterial strain. If vaccinated horses are exposed to the specific strain in the vaccine, effective protection is more likely. If they're exposed to a different strain, it's less likely to afford protection against the disease, Waldridge said. "It definitely appears to be a strain-related disease," he said. "How lucky or unlucky you get and how sick the horse gets in the end depends on which strain ends up infecting the horse."

Should a horse contract PHF, treatment centers around intravenous oxytetracycline administration for several days. "If given early in the clinical course of the disease, a response to treatment is usually seen within 12 hours," Smith said. "This is associated with a drop in rectal temperature, followed by an improvement in demeanor, appetite, and borborygmal (gut) sounds.

"In animals that exhibit signs of enterocolitis (inflammation of the small intestine and colon), fluids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be administered," she added. "Laminitis is more common than in other causes of enterocolitis and, if it develops, is usually severe and often refractory to treatment."

Waldridge also cautions that just because a horse's clinical signs appear to resolve initially, the situation can still take a rapid downturn.

While PHF can, indeed, be challenging to prevent, owners can take steps to reduce horses' risk of consuming infected insects and snails.

Chances are, Central Kentucky veterinarians will still see their share of PHF cases this year. But Waldridge said they'll face each one head-on and learn from the ones that don't end with a healthy horse. "It's my most-hated disease," he said. "Every year I swear I'm not going to let it get the best of me. There's always at least one horse a year that just tortures you -- you've done everything right, and then it still gets you."

[Byline: Erica Larson]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This disease goes by many names and can mimic conditions such as salmonellosis which can complicate the diagnosis.

Potomac horse fever has several names including equine monocytic ehrlichiosis, ditch fever, Shasta River crud and equine ehrlichial colitis. You will note some of these synomyms are descriptive of the water as well as the condition.

Potomac horse fever (PHF) is an acute enterocolitis syndrome producing mild colic, fever, and diarrhea in horses of all ages, as well as abortion in pregnant mares. The causative agent, _Neorickettsia risticii_ has been reported in dogs and cats; cattle appear to be resistant to infection.

The clinical features of PHF are typified initially by mild depression and anorexia, followed by a fever of 102-107F (38.9-41.7C). At this stage, intestinal sounds may be decreased. Within 24-48 hr, a moderate to severe diarrhea, with feces ranging in consistency from that usually seen in cows to watery, develops in approximately 60 percent of affected horses. The onset of diarrhea is often accompanied by mild abdominal discomfort. Some horses develop severe signs of sepsis and dehydration. Clinical signs can be indistinguishable from those of Salmonella and other infectious causes of enterocolitis.

Several months after clinical disease in pregnant mares, abortion due to fetal infection with _N. risticii_ may occur. Experimentally, pregnant mares infected at 100-160 days of gestation abort at 190-250 days of gestation. The abortion is accompanied by placentitis and retained placenta. Fetal lesions include colitis, periportal hepatitis, and lymphoid hyperplasia of mesenteric lymph nodes and spleen. Necropsy findings in nonpregnant horses with enterocolitis are nonspecific and reveal diffuse inflammation, mainly in the large intestines.

A definitive diagnosis should be based on isolation or identification of _N. risticii_ from the blood or feces of infected horses by cell culture or PCR. Serologic testing is of limited value as a diagnostic tool.

Treatment with Oxtetracycline intravenously is the recommended treatment. The article nicely described prevention of the disease, especially as it relates to lights and the attraction of the flies.

Perhaps someday, we will have a better vaccine that will include the various strains and be more protective.

Portions of this comment were extracted from https://www.merckvetmanual.com/digestive-system/intestinal-diseases-in-horses-and-foals/potomac-horse-fever. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=5247748,220.]
See Also
2016
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA (03): (WV) 20160923.4511391
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA (02): (MD) 20160731.4383542
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA: (KY) 20160707.4330954
2015
----
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA: (MD) 20150801.3551062
2013
----
Potomac horse fever, equine - Canada: (ON) 20130825.1900358
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA: (VA) 20130716.1826923
2012
----
Potomac horse fever, equine - USA (IN) 20120708.1193550
2010
----
Potomac horse fever - USA: (NY) 20100816.2834
2007
----
Potomac horse fever, WNV - USA (TX) 20070713.2256
2002
----
Potomac horse fever - USA (Kentucky) (02) 20020813.5034
Potomac horse fever - USA (Kentucky) 20020809.5006
.................................................sb/tg/jh
</body>
