<header id=056745>
Published Date: 2020-08-08 08:59:54 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Alcohol poisoning - USA: hand sanitizer
Archive Number: 20200808.7656505
</header>
<body id=056745>
ALCOHOL POISONING - USA: HAND SANITIZER
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 5 Aug 2020
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6932e1.htm?s_cid=mm6932e1_w


Citation: Yip L, Bixler D, Brooks DE, et al. Serious adverse health events, including death, associated with ingesting alcohol-based hand sanitizers containing methanol -- Arizona and New Mexico, May-June 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. Epub 5 Aug 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6932e1

Summary
------
What is already known about this topic?
Alcohol-based hand sanitizers should only contain ethanol or isopropanol, but some products imported into the USA have been found to contain methanol.

What is added by this report?
From 1 May 2020 through 30 Jun 2020, 15 cases of methanol poisoning were reported in Arizona and New Mexico, associated with swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Four patients died, and 3 were discharged with visual impairment.

What are the implications for public health practice?
Alcohol-based hand sanitizer products should never be ingested. In patients with compatible signs and symptoms or after having swallowed hand sanitizer, prompt evaluation for methanol poisoning is required. Health departments in all states should coordinate with poison centers to identify cases of methanol poisoning.

Alcohol-based hand sanitizer is a liquid, gel, or foam containing ethanol or isopropanol used to disinfect hands. Hand hygiene is an important component of the US response to the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). If soap and water are not readily available, CDC recommends the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing at least 60% ethyl alcohol (ethanol) or 70% isopropyl alcohol (isopropanol) in community settings (1); in healthcare settings, CDC recommendations specify alcohol-based hand sanitizer products should contain 60%-95% alcohol (60% or more ethanol or 70% or more isopropanol) (2). According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which regulates alcohol-based hand sanitizers as an over-the-counter drug, methanol (methyl alcohol) is not an acceptable ingredient. Cases of ethanol toxicity following ingestion of alcohol-based hand sanitizer products have been reported in persons with alcohol use disorder (3,4). On 30 Jun 2020, the CDC received notification from public health partners in Arizona and New Mexico of cases of methanol poisoning associated with ingestion of alcohol-based hand sanitizers. The case reports followed an FDA consumer alert issued on 19 Jun 2020 warning about specific hand sanitizers containing methanol. Whereas early clinical effects of methanol and ethanol poisoning are similar (e.g., headache, blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, loss of coordination, and decreased level of consciousness), persons with methanol poisoning might develop severe anion-gap metabolic acidosis, seizures, and blindness. If left untreated, methanol poisoning can be fatal (5). Survivors of methanol poisoning might have permanent visual impairment, including complete vision loss; data suggest vision loss results from the direct toxic effect of formate, a toxic anion metabolite of methanol, on the optic nerve (6). CDC and state partners established a case definition of alcohol-based hand sanitizer-associated methanol poisoning and reviewed 62 poison center call records from 1 May 2020 through 30 Jun 2020 to characterize reported cases. Medical records were reviewed to abstract details missing from poison center call records. During this period, 15 adult patients met the case definition, including persons who were American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN). All had ingested an alcohol-based hand sanitizer and were subsequently admitted to a hospital. Four patients died and 3 were discharged with vision impairment. Persons should never ingest alcohol-based hand sanitizer, avoid use of specific imported products found to contain methanol, and continue to monitor FDA guidance (7). Clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion for methanol poisoning when evaluating adult or pediatric patients with reported swallowing of an alcohol-based hand sanitizer product or with symptoms, signs, and laboratory findings (e.g., elevated anion-gap metabolic acidosis) compatible with methanol poisoning. Treatment of methanol poisoning includes supportive care, correction of acidosis, administration of an alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor (e.g., fomepizole), and frequently, hemodialysis.

A case of alcohol-based hand sanitizer-associated methanol poisoning was defined as detectable blood methanol concentration and a history of alcohol-based hand sanitizer exposure (e.g., ingestion, dermal, ocular, inhalation, or injection) in any person who sought medical attention in Arizona or New Mexico during 1 May 2020 through 30 Jun 2020. To identify and characterize cases, the CDC collaborated with the Arizona Department of Health Services, Arizona Poison and Drug Information Center System, New Mexico Department of Health, and New Mexico Poison and Drug Information Center to identify and review poison center call records. Clinical and demographic data were abstracted from records meeting the case definition. Patients were characterized according to age, sex, signs and symptoms at evaluation, blood test results, including methanol levels, presence of anion-gap acidosis, treatments received, and outcomes. Medical records were reviewed for clinical and demographic details missing from the poison center call records. An illustrative case vignette is presented. Activity was determined to meet the requirements of public health surveillance as defined in 45 CFR 46.102(l)(2).

During 1 May 2020 through 30 Jun 2020, 15 cases of alcohol-based hand sanitizer-associated methanol poisoning were identified, including persons who were AI/AN (Table; see source URL). All patients had reportedly ingested hand sanitizer, and all were admitted to a hospital. The mean patient age was 43 years (range, 21-65 years); 13 were male. All patients had a history of swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizer products. The earliest available blood methanol concentrations ranged from 21 mg/dL to more than 500 mg/dL. All patients had evidence of a metabolic acidosis: Anion gap levels ranged from 17 to 49 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (normal, 3-10), serum bicarbonate concentrations ranged from less than 5 to 13 mEq/L (normal, 22-28), and blood pH ranged from 6.70 to 7.25 (normal, 7.35-7.45). Six patients developed seizures during their hospitalization. All patients were treated with fomepizole (a competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase, the enzyme catalyzing the initial step in the metabolism of methanol to its toxic metabolites), and 9 received hemodialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy. As of 8 Jul 2020, 4 patients remain hospitalized. Among 7 patients discharged from the hospital, 4 had no sequelae, and 3 were discharged with new visual impairment. Among the 4 patients who died, 3 had seizures at the time of admission; initial signs and symptoms were not reported for the 4th patient.

Illustrative case: A man aged 44 years was evaluated at a healthcare facility for recent onset of visual impairment. The patient reported drinking an unknown quantity of alcohol-based hand sanitizer during the few days before seeking medical care. Initial laboratory investigations were notable for a blood methanol concentration of 97 mg/dL and metabolic acidosis, with an anion gap of 32 mEq/L, serum bicarbonate concentration of less than 6 mEq/L, and arterial blood pH of 7.09. His clinical course was complicated by seizures. The patient was treated with fomepizole and underwent hemodialysis. He recovered after a 6-day hospitalization for acute methanol poisoning and was discharged with near-total vision loss.

Discussion: In addition to social distancing and consistent use of face masks, hand hygiene is an integral component of the response to the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in the USA (https://www.cdc.gov/handwashing/when-how-handwashing.html). Practicing hand hygiene, for example, by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, is a simple and effective way to decrease the spread of pathogens and infections (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/prevention.html). If soap and water are not readily available, the CDC recommends the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing at least 60% alcohol (ethanol or isopropanol) in community settings (1); alcohol-based hand sanitizers used in healthcare settings should contain 60%-95% alcohol (60% or more ethanol or 70% or more isopropanol) (2). This investigation highlights the serious adverse health events, including death, that can occur after ingesting alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing methanol. Safety messaging to avoid ingestion of any alcohol-based hand sanitizer product should continue (https://www.cdc.gov/handwashing/show-me-the-science-hand-sanitizer.html). Similar cases of methanol toxicity might be occurring in other states and localities.

Swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing methanol can cause life-threatening methanol poisoning. Young children might unintentionally swallow these products, whereas adolescents or adults with history of alcohol use disorder might intentionally swallow these products as an alcohol (ethanol) substitute (3,4).

Although methanol can be absorbed through the skin (8), transcutaneous methanol poisoning is rare and has been reported under unusual circumstances (9). The extent and rate of transcutaneous methanol absorption depends on variables such as its form (e.g., vapors, liquid, or solution), contact time, dose, concentration, and size of the exposure area (8,10) (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022202X1546837X).

The findings in this report are subject to at least 2 limitations. First, the clinical diagnosis of methanol poisoning can be challenging because eliciting an exposure history can be challenging for patients with altered mental status, and some hospitals might be unable to test for a blood methanol level. Cases of methanol poisoning might not have been recognized or reported to poison centers or state health departments. Second, the extent of potential exposure to alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing methanol is uncertain; additional cases might be identified. As of 15 Jul 2020, the FDA had tested and identified 67 alcohol-based hand sanitizer products containing methanol (7). These products are being recalled by the manufacturer or distributor in the USA. An FDA investigation is ongoing.

Severe methanol poisoning resulting in permanent disability or death can occur after swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing methanol. The public should check their products against the FDA updates on "Hand Sanitizers Consumers Should Not Use" website (7). If the product is on this list, its use should be discontinued immediately, and the product should be disposed of in hazardous waste containers; these products should not be flushed down a toilet or poured down a drain (https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-advises-consumers-not-use-hand-sanitizer-products-manufactured-eskbiochem). All alcohol-based hand sanitizers should only be used to disinfect hands and should never be swallowed. Children using hand sanitizers should be supervised, and these products should be kept out of reach of children when not in use. Swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizer products, including those not containing methanol, might also lead to serious illness and outcomes, including death (3,4). Consumers who have been exposed to alcohol-based hand sanitizers containing methanol should stop using them immediately and seek immediate medical attention if they experience any concerning symptoms. Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion for methanol poisoning when evaluating patients with either a history of swallowing an alcohol-based hand sanitizer or compatible signs and symptoms and, if needed, obtain medical management advice from their regional poison center (1-800-222-1222).

References
1. CDC. Handwashing in community settings. Hand sanitizer use out and about. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/handwashing/hand-sanitizer-use.html
2. CDC. Hand hygiene recommendations. Guidance for healthcare providers about hand hygiene and COVID-19. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/hand-hygiene.html
3. Emadi A, Coberly L. Intoxication of a hospitalized patient with an isopropanol-based hand sanitizer. N Engl J Med. 2007; 356: 530-1.
4. Schneir AB, Clark RF. Death caused by ingestion of an ethanol-based hand sanitizer. J Emerg Med. 2013; 45: 358-60.
5. Kraut JA, Mullins ME. Toxic alcohols. N Engl J Med. 2018; 378: 270-80.
6. Jacobsen D, McMartin KE. Methanol and ethylene glycol poisonings. Mechanism of toxicity, clinical course, diagnosis and treatment. Med Toxicol. 1986; 1: 309-34.
7. Food and Drug Administration. FDA updates on hand sanitizers consumers should not use. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2020. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-updates-hand-sanitizers-consumers-should-not-use
8. Batterman SA, Franzblau A. Time-resolved cutaneous absorption and permeation rates of methanol in human volunteers. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1997; 70: 341-51.
9. Chan APL, Chan TYK. Methanol as an unlisted ingredient in supposedly alcohol-based hand rub can pose serious health risk. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018; 15: 1440.
10. Dutkiewicz B, Konczalik J, Karwacki W. Skin absorption and per os administration of methanol in men. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1980; 47: 81-8.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The alcohol content of these hand sanitizers is very high in order to kill some germs.

Alcohol poisoning is a serious -- and sometimes deadly -- consequence of drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much, too quickly can affect your breathing, heart rate, body temperature, and gag reflex and potentially lead to coma and death.

Drinking even a small amount of a substance, such as hand sanitizer, having a high percentage of alcohol can cause the same problem. Alcohol poisoning can also occur when adults or children accidentally or intentionally drink household products containing alcohol.

A person with alcohol poisoning needs immediate medical attention. If you suspect someone has alcohol poisoning, call for emergency medical help right away.

Alcohol in the form of ethanol (ethyl alcohol) is found in alcoholic beverages, mouthwash, cooking extracts, some medications and certain household products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many alcoholic beverages, especially in a short period of time.

Other forms of alcohol -- including isopropyl alcohol (found in rubbing alcohol, lotions and some cleaning products) and methanol or ethylene glycol (a common ingredient in antifreeze, paints and solvents) -- can cause another type of toxic poisoning that requires emergency treatment.

Alcohol poisoning signs include confusion, vomiting, seizures, slow breathing (fewer than 8 breaths/min), irregular breathing (a gap of more than 10 seconds between breaths), blue-tinged skin or pale skin, low body temperature (hypothermia), passing out (unconsciousness) and can't be awakened. It's not necessary to have all these signs and symptoms before you seek help. A person who is unconscious or can't be awakened is at risk of dying.

Alcohol poisoning treatment usually involves supportive care while your body rids itself of the alcohol, assuming help is received promptly. Other measures may be necessary if the person's breathing or heart has stopped. Treatment administered early on typically includes careful monitoring, prevention of breathing or choking problems, oxygen therapy, fluids given through a vein (intravenously) to prevent dehydration, use of vitamins, and glucose to help prevent serious complications of alcohol poisoning.

Sadly, this use of alternative methods to obtain an inebriated "high" is reminiscent of the prohibition times in the USA. Equally sad is people consuming the hand sanitizer and believing it will keep them safe from the COVID-19 virus.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/alcohol-poisoning/basics/definition/con-20029020. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=7656505,106]
See Also
2016
----
Alcohol poisoning - USA, Sweden: hand sanitizer, consumption 20160229.4058927
2015
----
Alcohol poisoning, children - USA: hand sanitizer 20150921.3660960
.................................................sb/lxl/tg/rd/lxl
</body>
