<header id=058755>
Published Date: 2020-01-10 06:37:53 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (08): novel coronavirus, WHO
Archive Number: 20200110.6881082
</header>
<body id=058755>
UNDIAGNOSED PNEUMONIA - CHINA (HUBEI) (08): NOVEL CORONAVIRUS, WHO
******************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] WHO statement
[2] Sina Tech News: Evolution of pathogen identification
[3] Stat News: Overview

******
[1] WHO statement
Date: Thu 9 Jan 2020
Source: WHO press release [edited]
https://www.who.int/china/news/detail/09-01-2020-who-statement-regarding-cluster-of-pneumonia-cases-in-wuhan-china


WHO statement regarding cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, China
[9 Jan 2020] statement
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chinese authorities have made a preliminary determination of a novel (or new) coronavirus, identified in a hospitalized person with pneumonia in Wuhan. Chinese investigators conducted gene sequencing of the virus, using an isolate from one positive patient sample. Preliminary identification of a novel virus in a short period of time is a notable achievement and demonstrates China's increased capacity to manage new outbreaks.

Initial information about the cases of pneumonia in Wuhan provided by Chinese authorities last week [week of 1 Jan 2020] -- including the occupation, location, and symptom profile of the people affected -- pointed to a coronavirus (CoV) as a possible pathogen causing this cluster. Chinese authorities subsequently reported that laboratory tests ruled out SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, and other common respiratory pathogens.

Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses with some causing less-severe disease, such as the common cold, and others more severe disease such as MERS and SARS. Some transmit easily from person to person, while others do not. According to Chinese authorities, the virus in question can cause severe illness in some patients and does not transmit readily between people.

Globally, novel coronaviruses emerge periodically in different areas, including SARS in 2002 and MERS in 2012. Several known coronaviruses are circulating in animals that have not yet infected humans. As surveillance improves more coronaviruses are likely to be identified.

China has strong public health capacities and resources to respond and manage respiratory disease outbreaks. In addition to treating the patients in care and isolating new cases as they may be identified, public health officials remain focused on continued contact tracing, conducting environmental assessments at the seafood market, and investigations to identify the pathogen causing the outbreak.

In the coming weeks, more comprehensive information is required to understand the current status and epidemiology of the outbreak, and the clinical picture. Further investigations are also required to determine the source, modes of transmission, extent of infection, and countermeasures implemented. WHO continues to monitor the situation closely and, together with its partners, is ready to provide technical support to China to investigate and respond to this outbreak.

The preliminary determination of a novel virus will assist authorities in other countries to conduct disease detection and response. Over the past week, people with symptoms of pneumonia and reported travel history to Wuhan have been identified at international airports.

WHO does not recommend any specific measures for travellers. WHO advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on China based on the information currently available.

Media Contacts
Paige Snider
External Relations and Communication
World Health Organization
<wpchnmedia@who.int>

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2] Sina Tech News: Evolution of pathogen identification
Date: Thu 9 Jan 2020 19:37:00 CST
Source: Sina Technology, Caijing Magazine report [in Chinese, trans., edited]
http://tech.sina.com.cn/roll/2020-01-09/doc-iihnzahk3089851.shtml


When a virus strikes, identifying the pathogen quickly and accurately is the key to success. This depends on the development of scientific research, the improvement of the disease surveillance system and the continuous openness and transparency of information.

The "new coronavirus" has caused several cases of unexplained pneumonia in Wuhan [Hubei] to be initially "identified."

According to Xinhua News Agency, on [9 Jan 2020], Xu Jianguo, the leader of the preliminary assessment of pathogenic test results and an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, said that the expert group believes that the pathogen of this unexplained viral pneumonia case was initially determined to be a new type of coronavirus.

At 21:00 [9 PM] on [7 Jan 2020], the expert group detected a new coronavirus in the laboratory and obtained its entire genome sequence.

A scholar close to the expert group told the reporter of Caijing that the wild animals sold in the South China Seafood Market are currently under inspection to track down the source of the virus.

The Wuhan Municipal Health and Health Commission reported that as of [5 Jan 2020], there were 59 cases of viral pneumonia, of which 7 were critically ill patients, and the remaining patients had overall stable vital signs and no deaths.

On [8 Jan 2020], 8 patients were cured and discharged. In previous reports, viruses such as SARS and avian influenza have been excluded.

A person in charge of the pathogenic laboratory of a disease control center in a northwestern province told the Caijing reporter that after getting the specimens, the laboratory could screen for a known or common virus within a day. These include influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, SARS, etc. However, it takes longer to detect and identify unknown viruses.

The SARS epidemic that broke out in 2003 took scientists more than 5 months to finally determine the new coronavirus; the H7N9 avian influenza epidemic in 2013 took more than one month from the 1st case to the diagnosis of the virus.

The Wuhan epidemic was first notified on [31 Dec 2019], and was initially identified as "new coronavirus" by research experts at an interval of 9 days. Relying on the progress of scientific research and the prevention and control system of infectious diseases, the detection time of pathogens has been greatly shortened.

Coronavirus disorder
--------------------
The virus that causes unexplained pneumonia in Wuhan, like SARS, is a coronavirus. Under the microscope, the virus had obvious stick-shaped particle protrusions on the outer mold, so it looked like the crown of medieval European emperors and was named "Coronavirus".

The virus was first isolated from chickens more than 80 years ago. In 1965, scientists isolated the 1st human coronavirus.

[A] virus is a simple microorganism composed of nucleic acid and protein shell, including DNA and RNA viruses. Coronaviruses are RNA viruses. Its variability is high because its recombination rate between RNA and RNA is very high. In other words, the genetic material that determines its viral characteristics is constantly changing.

The current research progress is that the coronavirus family contains nearly 20 viruses of the genus [alpha, beta, gamma, delta] among which there are 6 types of coronavirus known to infect humans. Among them, the 4 coronaviruses are more common in the population, and they are less pathogenic, and generally cause only minor respiratory symptoms similar to the common cold. The other 2, SARS and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus, can cause severe respiratory diseases. The former (SARS) has obvious interpersonal transmission, causing the disease to spread rapidly. Classical coronavirus infection, which mainly occurs in winter and spring, is an important cause of acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis in adults. Due to the high variability of the coronavirus, the original vaccine will fail and immunity will fail.

Li Gang, director of the Wuhan Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a media interview that the clinical manifestations of patients in Wuhan were viral pneumonia. More stringent preventive public health measures such as patient isolation and close contact tracing are needed.

According to the Wuhan Health Commission, the clinical manifestations of unexplained pneumonia in Wuhan were mainly fever, a few patients had difficulty breathing, and chest radiographs showed invasive lesions of both lungs. The main difference from SARS symptoms is that no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission has been found.

"No clear evidence of human-to-human transmission or medical staff infection was found." In 3 circulars issued by the Wuhan Health Commission, this sentence repeated. An influenza control expert told a Caijing reporter that whether human-to-human transmission occurs after infection with the virus depends on the characteristics of the virus, especially its binding to the receptor. This characteristic is also related to whether the virus is likely to infect humans. In 2003, H5N1 human bird flu cases continued to appear, causing a high lethality.

The flu control experts explained that the tissue structure of the avian influenza virus receptors is different compared to human influenza viruses. The human upper respiratory tract does not have avian influenza virus receptors, so it is difficult to infect humans. But people in the lower respiratory tract have receptors for avian influenza virus in the lungs. Once avian influenza virus affects human lungs, it can cause human infection and the symptoms are severe.

Despite a long history of confrontation with viruses, to this day, humans still cannot fully understand such a small, simple structure of acellular microorganisms.

9 days from initial notification
--------------------------------
In the face of virus invasion, rapid and accurate identification of the pathogen is the key to success. "The pathogen of unexplained viral pneumonia cases was initially identified as a new type of coronavirus", which is the latest news of unexplained pneumonia in Wuhan. 9 days from the 1st notification.

At 1 pm on [31 Dec 2019], a staff member of the Wuhan Centers for Disease Control and Prevention told a reporter from Caijing that the Wuhan Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had tested the specimens, and the Hubei Province Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was organizing experts to review the case specimens.

Only by knowing the pathogen can we target medicine. In this race against time, "every second counts" is not an exaggeration. This depends on the development of scientific research, the improvement of the disease surveillance system and the continuous openness and transparency of information.

In April 2003, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced in Geneva that the pathogen of SARS is a new coronavirus known as SARS coronavirus. This time, more than 5 months away from the 1st case notification.

On the afternoon of [29 Mar 2013], the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention isolated 3 strains of H7N9 avian influenza virus from the specimens submitted for examination and confirmed the diagnosis. At this time, the 1st case had been onset for more than a month.

During the "unknown pneumonia" incident in Wuhan, the pathogen identification time was significantly reduced. The latest bulletin on [9 Jan 2020] showed that the laboratory used methods such as genome sequencing, nucleic acid detection, and virus isolation to etiologically detect samples from patients with alveolar lavage fluid, throat swabs, and blood.

To confirm the cause of an epidemic disease, 3 points need to be met: 1st, the suspected pathogen must be found in the patient, and the pathogenic nucleic acid can be detected in the patient's clinical sample. 2nd, pathogens can be successfully isolated from clinical samples of patients. In addition, isolated pathogens can cause the same disease symptoms when infecting a host animal. The patient's serum antibody titer during the recovery period increased 4-fold, which can help identify the pathogen. Scientific research, such as pathogen isolation and pathogenicity identification, typically takes weeks.

A director of the Respiratory Department of Beijing Top Three Hospital analyzed the reporter of Caijing that whether the cultured virus can grow depends on the amount and viability of the virus in clinical specimens. Immunological methods are able to detect viral antigens from respiratory secretions, but the final results also depend on a relatively high viral load. The person in charge of one of the aforementioned pathogen laboratories added that the virus lives in the cell and must find the specific cell it grows in, and mutation may occur during isolation. Even if the virus is isolated, animal experiments need to be performed to verify compliance with the clinical manifestations of existing patients and determine the virus in question. After that, the virus must be cultivated, which is also a time-consuming task, sometimes it takes at least 20 days.

The emergence of molecular biology technology has enabled experimenters to find the pathogen's nucleic acid, genome and other evidence in a short period of time, and identify whether it is a known virus or a type of virus. One of the achievements of the "National Major Project for Infectious Diseases" released by the Ministry of Science and Technology in 2017 is to establish a detection technology system that identifies 300 known pathogens within 72 hours.

The genetic information of the virus is stored in the nucleic acid, which at the same time indicates the characteristics of the virus and also acts as an "identity card", which can help researchers distinguish the specific virus type. The main principle is to design another nucleic acid sequence that can match the virus identity information. In the vast ocean of nucleic acids, like a probe, paired with a specific "identity" virus.

The director of the Beijing Respiratory Department told the Caijing reporter that using the above principles, the existing technology can detect 12-15 viruses at the same time, which has become the standard method for respiratory virus detection. 1st, such technologies will be used to screen for known or common pneumonia viruses. The person in charge of the above-mentioned pathogen laboratory said, "In less than a day, it is possible to determine whether there are a dozen known pneumonia viruses." These include influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, SARS, etc.

If the specific virus type has not been identified, the laboratory director will commission a testing company to compare the specimen with the genetic information in the pathogen database to determine the virus type. The above method requires predicting the pathogen sequence, and is powerless against unknown pathogens and pathogens with large sequence variation. "If these methods are still uncertain, we will consider whether it is a new pathogen. The virus needs to be isolated and cultured, and then identified by various methods." The person in charge of the said pathogen laboratory said.

In the end, the expert group believed that the pathogen of unexplained viral pneumonia cases in Wuhan was initially determined as a new type of coronavirus.

Track down the root cause of the virus
--------------------------------------
Only by knowing where the virus came from can we control its outbreak from the source. At present, the etiology of unexplained pneumonia in Wuhan is still ongoing. A scholar close to the expert group told Caijing that at present, wild animals appearing in the South China seafood market are being inspected to track down the source of the virus.

Taking the SARS coronavirus as an example, the traceability of the virus from civet to bat is not easy. It took more than 2 years. In 2003, researchers isolated 3 SARS-like viruses from 6 civet specimens, confirming that civet sold on the market is the direct cause of SARS infection. But it was not until 2 years later that the original host of SARS was discovered. An article published by Shi Zhengli's team at the Wuhan Institute of Virology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in the journal Science revealed that bats are "natural hosts of SARS-like coronavirus."

Although many domestic markets for wildlife trading have been restricted or facing closures since the outbreak of SARS and bird flu, the phenomenon of buying, selling, and eating wildlife is still very common. In the South China Seafood Market in Wuhan, "wild meat" was never completely banned at the outbreak of viral pneumonia of unknown cause. According to previous reports by Red Star News, there are a lot of abandoned rabbit heads and animal offal in the corner of Sixth Street in the western part of the market. The owner of the stall said that there are several shops selling wild game in the market, including pheasant and snake.

The multiple unexplained pneumonia cases in Wuhan this time reminded the danger of wildlife trading again. Yuan Guoyong, a microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong who is involved in the SARS virus research, mentioned in an article in the famous scientific journal "Nature" that wildlife habitats should not be disturbed, and wildlife should not be brought into the market for circulation and trading. In Yuan Guoyong's view, learning to respect nature and respect it is "very important to prevent the occurrence of new infectious diseases."

This article is the exclusive cooperation content between Caijing and Tencent News.

[Byline: Wen, Zhu He, and editor Wang Xiao]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[A very good review of the process involved in the identification of viral etiologies for respiratory diseases.

The ending conclusion on the need to respect the wildlife and the danger in wildlife trading leads one to remember that in the past 25 or more years, 75 percent of new human diseases involved species jumps from "domestic" animals (which include livestock and camels); and 70 percent of new disease in domestic animals involved species jumps from wildlife to domestic animals. With respect to the SARS-CoV, the jump was from bats, to civets, to humans via the wet markets and then human-to-human, and with the MERS-CoV, while the full transmission isn't completely defined yet, there was the jump from bats, to camels, to humans, and in selected settings, human-to-human transmission. - Mod.MPP]

******
[3] Stat News: Overview
Date: Thu 9 Jan 2020
Source: Stat News [edited]
https://www.statnews.com/2020/01/09/chinese-scientists-obtain-genetic-sequence-of-mysterious-virus-a-key-step-in-containment-efforts/


Chinese scientists have recovered a previously unknown virus from an infected individual and generated a full genetic sequence of it, a key step in efforts to learn more about the cause of an outbreak of unusual pneumonia in the city of Wuhan, state-run media reported [Thu 9 Jan 2020]. Fragments of the same virus were picked up in testing of 15 patients among the 59 who have been identified as infected with the mysterious pneumonia.

The speed of the findings is impressive; the 1st case in this outbreak became ill less than a month ago. "Preliminary identification of a novel virus in a short period of time is a notable achievement and demonstrates China's increased capacity to manage new outbreaks," the World Health Organization's representative in China, Dr Gauden Galea, said in a statement. But more work is needed to confirm whether the virus is the cause of the outbreak and, if it is, to identify what animal species transmitted the virus to people and whether there are other cases elsewhere, Galea said.

The report on CCTV appears to be the 1st official confirmation from Chinese authorities that they believe a new virus is responsible for this outbreak -- specifically a coronavirus, a type of virus in the family that includes SARS and MERS. When viewed under an electron microscope, it exhibits the crown-like halo that gives coronaviruses their name, said Xu Jianguo, identified by CCTV as the leader of the preliminary assessment of the test results and a member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering.

The outbreak is occurring in Wuhan, about 700 miles [about 1127 km] south of Beijing. Wuhan is a leading center for virology research in China, and infectious diseases experts watching this outbreak have predicted scientists there would quickly find the cause. Still, they cautioned that this discovery does not mean the outbreak is over or the threat has passed. "Everybody's assuming ... that this coronavirus is the cause. We don't know that. They're assuming that market was the origin. We don't know that. And we don't know how many other cases are walking around right now," said Peter Daszak, president of EcoHealth Alliance, a non-profit organization that works in this sphere.

The 1st known case in the Wuhan outbreak became noticeably ill on [12 Dec 2019], according to a statement released [Sun 5 Jan 2020] by the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission. The discovery of an outbreak and identification of a new virus in a period of less than one month is exceptional, experts said. "I am stunned by the timeline and speed of this isolation and characterization, if it's all true," said Matthew Frieman, a coronavirus expert at the University of Maryland School of Medicine.

The community of scientists who research emerging infectious diseases has been speculating for days that the source of the outbreak was a new coronavirus, a class of viruses that has shown itself adept at making the leap from animals to people. Coronaviruses originate in bats but are able to infect a number of mammals.

Confirmation that scientists have the genetic sequence of the virus will increase pressure on China to release at least part of that sequence, so that health facilities around the world know what to look for as they try to detect possible cases from this outbreak and prevent spread elsewhere. During the 2003 SARS outbreak, infected travelers spread the virus from China to Hong Kong and from there to Viet Nam, Singapore, Taiwan, and Toronto, Canada.

In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on [Wed 8 Jan 2020] instructed doctors to ask patients with severe respiratory infections whether they have been to Wuhan. Hong Kong and other countries in Southeast Asia are isolating any such cases until they can be tested for influenza, rhinoviruses, and other viruses that cause colds and flu.

This type of very broad net will draw in many people who were in or near Wuhan and who have a respiratory tract infection but who have nothing to do with this outbreak -- especially in the middle of flu season. That will eat up resources and the time of doctors, laboratories, and sick people who don't need to be isolated.

"If the Chinese truly have sequenced the virus and they've demonstrated that it's present in other patients, that's means there's a PCR diagnostic test available. And the Chinese need to make that available to the rest of the world immediately," said Ralph Baric, a coronavirus expert at the University of North Carolina. "And the longer they wait, the more likely the scientific community will go from a positive response to a negative response, in terms of how China is handling this outbreak," he said.

The CCTV report did not provide details on the type of coronavirus that has been discovered -- for instance if it is one of several SARS-like viruses that have been found in bats in China, and if so, how genetically different it is from SARS. A number of these SARS-like viruses are able to infect human tissue cells in the laboratory, suggesting they might be able to spill over into people if given the right circumstances. Xu said more research on the new virus is needed.

There has been limited information about the nature of the illness in people who have been infected. Chinese authorities have said no one has died from this infection; 7, however, were in critical condition as of [Sun 5 Jan 2020]. In a statement that same day, the WHO said that the main symptom was fever; some patients had difficulty breathing.

The CCTV report also did not indicate whether scientists investigating the outbreak had identified the source of the virus -- which will be key to any effort to determine if the virus is spreading in other locations as well. [Baric] said coronaviruses could jump to people directly from bats, which are eaten in China. But this virus could have used what is known as an intermediate host -- an animal species that becomes infected with a bat virus that then transmits it to people. Daszak said he believes efforts to look for the virus in animals have not started. "There are probably a dozen to 2 dozen target species that you would go after to do a wildlife investigation. I don't know if they're doing that," he said, adding that EcoHealth Alliance hopes to partner with Chinese researchers on the work "once the politics have died down."

China was roundly criticized for its early bungling of the SARS outbreak and it is widely believed authorities there have no wish to be embarrassed like that again. The capacity of the country to respond to infectious diseases outbreaks increased markedly in the aftermath of SARS. During that outbreak, it was determined that palm civets, a wild animal eaten as a delicacy in southern China, were transmitting the virus. Chinese authorities ordered a widespread culling of civets to help stop the outbreak.

The Wuhan outbreak has been linked to a large seafood market that also sells the meat of exotic animals for consumption. The market was closed and decontaminated on [1 Jan 2020]. But it is important to know if other markets are selling infected animals, said Malik Peiris, a microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong. "If it can jump once, then it will jump again," Peiris said of the virus. He was one of the scientists who first identified the coronavirus that caused the 2003 SARS outbreak, which infected more than 8000 people and killed nearly 800.

The WHO said [Wed 8 Jan 2020] that Chinese authorities believe the virus "does not transmit readily between people." Earlier statements from the Wuhan Municipal Health Authority said there has been no person-to-person spread, but disease experts challenged that claim, saying it is impossible to rule out at this stage in the exploration of a new disease. "I don't know how you know that at all," Frieman said of China's claim there is no person-to-person transmission. He noted the number of cases reported makes it seem unlikely that animal-to-human transmission is the only way this virus spreads.

There have been at least 1 or 2 clusters of cases within families that have raised suspicions of limited person-to-person spread, a source familiar with the outbreak told STAT.

News of the pneumonia cases first emerged on [30 Dec 2019], when the local health authority told hospitals to be on the lookout for cases. The next day Chinese authorities informed the WHO that they were dealing with what looked like an outbreak caused by an unknown virus.

[Byline: Helen Branswell]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A very good overview of the status of the investigation and the many questions that remain to be answered. One piece of new information in the report above is the mention that "there have been at least 1 or 2 clusters of cases within families that have raised suspicions of limited person-to-person spread...". Now that the virus has been identified, further work is needed on the epidemiology of the transmission, including how much community wide transmission may have occurred.

It is important to mention that more and more countries are announcing "suspected cases, with media reports on respiratory illnesses in individuals who had been in Wuhan. Countries include South Korea, Thailand, Viet Nam, and Taiwan. In addition, neighboring Hong Kong has now identified 48 individuals who have a febrile respiratory illness with a history of travel to Wuhan. The Hong Kong Center for Health Protection maintains a line listing that is updated daily and includes the viral etiologies from specimens of these suspected cases. Etiologies include influenza viruses, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, and coronavirus HKU1, to name a few (see https://www.chp.gov.hk/files/pdf/enhanced_sur_pneumonia_wuhan_eng.pdf). There are patients who have not had any known viral pathogens isolated among these 48 cases, so it will be interesting to know results if and when testing for the novel coronavirus becomes available outside of Wuhan.

A map showing locations of major cities in China can be found at https://www.chinadiscovery.com/china-maps/city-maps.html.
HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of China: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6881082,5294.
- Mod.MPP]
See Also
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (07): official confirmation of novel coronavirus 20200108.6878869
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (06): Hong Kong surveillance, USA CDC alert 20200108.6876648
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (05): (HU) novel coronavirus identified 20200108.6877694
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (04): Hong Kong surveillance 20200106.6874277
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (03): updates, SARS, MERS ruled out, WHO, RFI 20200105.6872267
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (02): updates, other country responses, RFI 20200103.6869668
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU) (01): wildlife sales, market closed, RFI 20200102.6866757
2019
----
Undiagnosed pneumonia - China (HU): RFI 20191230.6864153
.................................................mpp/ml/mj/ml
</body>
