<header id=017452>
Published Date: 2022-12-06 16:52:20 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Ehrlichiosis - Australia (02): (QL) dogs, ticks
Archive Number: 20221206.8707124
</header>
<body id=017452>
EHRLICHIOSIS - AUSTRALIA (02): (QUEENSLAND) DOGS, TICKS
*******************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 5 Dec 2022
Source: ABC North Qld [edited]
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-12-06/how-to-protect-your-dogs-against-tickborne-disease/101733560


A rare tick-borne disease that can cause a "horrible death" in dogs has reached the east coast of Queensland for the first time. Ehrlichiosis is spread through ticks carrying the bacteria _Ehrlichia canis_ (_E.canis_) and can have deadly consequences for family pets.

A dog tested positive for the disease in Townsville last week. Campbell Costello from Outback & Airborne Veterinary Services said it was the first time the disease had been found on Australia's east coast and should not be underestimated.

"It's a big risk," the veterinarian said."I've had dogs come in bleeding from their eyes, the nose, the anus, struggling to breathe because they're bleeding into their lungs. They die a horrible death."

Authorities do not know how ehrlichiosis entered Australia but the 1st cases in the country were detected in dogs in Western Australia in May 2020.

The brown dog tick has been in Australia for decades, spread across Western Australia, the Northern Territory, northern South Australia, New South Wales and Queensland. It acts as the host to carry the bacteria.

Dr Costello said it was not a new tick but a bacterium, not seen in north Queensland before, which could cause the "radiation-like" signs in dogs. "This little bacteria is really sneaky," he said. "The tick bites the dog, regurgitates the bacteria into the dog's bloodstream, and then the bacteria goes and attacks the liver, the kidneys and, most importantly, bone marrow.

"A white blood cell comes along and eats [the bacteria], and it sits inside the white blood cell dormant. You kill all these mites in the bloodstream with antibiotics and every now and again, you'll get one that goes up and hides in a cell and then waits for the antibiotics to wear off and they relapse. So dogs can be really, really sick for a really, really long time."

Dr Costello said the tick-borne disease had been dubbed "the great pretender" because of how the disease presented in dogs. He said some signs could be unusual bleeding, lethargy, loss of appetite or anaemia.

Anaemia, fever, lethargy, weight loss and unusual bleeding or bruising are all signs of ehrlichiosis.

"It looks like anything," Dr Costello said. "It's just got a really wide variety of clinical signs. They can look yellow because their liver is infected and they've got jaundice."

There is currently no vaccine available for ehrlichiosis so prevention is the best method to protect your pet. Dr Costello said a combination of oral medication with a tick-prevention collar or treatment was most effective, offering 90 to 95% protection.

"[Oral tablets] only offer a ballpark 70% protection on their own, so it's very clear they must be on the tablet and a tick-prevention collar ... or you can use a spot-on treatment and a tablet."

Unfortunately, the disease is likely here to stay, so he says the priority for veterinarians is keeping it contained. "I don't see us stopping or stamping out this disease," Dr Costello said. "Anyone who is travelling, and they're going to take the pet with them in the car or an airplane, make sure they're on those products to prevent it from spreading."

Key points:

- A tick-borne bacteria which can kill dogs has spread to North Queensland
- Ehrlichiosis attacks a dog's immune system and signs can include unusual bleeding, lethargy, fever, and anaemia
- The best method of protection from ehrlichiosis is prevention through both a tick collar and oral tick treatment

[Byline: Mia Knight]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[Human health
------------
"Infected dogs do not transmit ehrlichiosis to people; however, in rare cases, infected ticks may infect people. The Australian Government Department of Health has information on their website [https://www.health.gov.au/our-work/dscatt] about ticks and human health precautions.

Advice for dog owners
---------------------
"You can do a number of things to help prevent this disease in your dogs:

"- Have your dog on a tick control program if living in or travelling to areas where the brown dog tick is present such as northern Australia.
- Use repellent tick collars and spot-ons as the best primary protection, in combination with tablets and chews registered for tick control.
- Where possible, avoid taking your dogs into tick-infested areas.
- Inspect your dog daily for ticks, especially if they have been in a tick-infested area. Run your fingers through your dog's coat over their skin and feel for abnormal bumps. Pay particular attention to the head and neck, inside their ears, on their chest, between their toes, and around their mouths and gums.
- If you are travelling with your dogs to Australia's northern regions, be particularly vigilant about tick-infested environments and congregations of dogs which may be carrying ticks. This includes places where you may stop at, like fuel stations and caravan parks.
- Contact your nearest vet if your dog is showing any of signs of the disease which include fever, lethargy, enlarged lymph nodes, loss of appetite, discharge from the eyes and nose, weight loss, anaemia, and bleeding disorders such as nosebleeds or bleeding under the skin that looks like small spots, patches, or bruising.

"Ehrlichiosis requires veterinary treatment and supportive care, and it can also resemble other conditions with similar signs, including tick-borne diseases such as anaplasmosis and babesiosis, which are already present.

"You should contact your private vet if you have a dog that is unwell, because early treatment provides the best chance for them to recover.

Reporting signs of the disease
------------------------------
"Ehrlichiosis is a nationally notifiable disease. This means, if you suspect your dog is showing signs of the disease, you should seek veterinary advice. Or your vet can report the disease by calling the national Emergency Animal Disease Watch hotline on 1800 675 888.

About ehrlichiosis
------------------
"The disease ehrlichiosis is caused by a tick-borne bacteria called _Ehrlichia canis_. The disease has 3 phases: an 'acute' phase or early signs of disease, a 'subclinical phase' where there are no outward signs of disease, and a 'chronic' or long-term stage of disease. Visible signs in the chronic form of the disease are similar to those in the acute phase but are more severe.

"Ehrlichiosis occurs worldwide, particularly in tropical and sub-tropical regions.

"Once the disease is in the brown dog tick population, it's very difficult to control, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions.

Government response to ehrlichiosis
-----------------------------------
"The national Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases met in response to this disease incursion, and in November 2020, the committee considered the surveillance data. It agreed that it was not technically feasible to eradicate the disease because it is established in the NT and north WA.

"The state and federal governments will continue to work on ehrlichiosis through the Animal Health Committee, which comprises the chief veterinary officers from each jurisdiction. The committee is currently investigating whether it is possible and practical to implement nationally consistent control strategies for the disease.

"Most jurisdictions are running awareness campaigns to inform the community and travellers about ehrlichiosis and the actions they can take to prevent the disease in their dogs."
https://www.outbreak.gov.au/current-responses-to-outbreaks/ehrlichiosis-dogs (Photographs of some of the dogs are included).

This is quite troubling. Yes, the disease is carried by ticks, but I do not understand why appropriate ectoparasite control is not more available to canine pet owners. For example, afoxolaner is a commonly available ectoparasite treatment for ticks and fleas, and it's available in an easy-to-deliver chewable form in the US and other countries.

"Afoxolaner is used to treat and control flea and tick infestations in dogs. Sometimes afoxolaner is used for the treatment of sarcoptic mange or demodectic mange. The tablet should always be given as directed by your veterinarian." https://vcahospitals.com/know-your-pet/afoxolaner

According to the manufacturer the product is approved for use and available in Australia https://www.boehringer-ingelheim.com/press-release/two-new-claims-nexgard-range-eu-and-australia.

It has proven very effective in other countries, yet it appears veterinarians are not recommending it, or people are not providing preventative measures for their pets. If the authorities are concerned about this disease, why is there not a campaign to make all pet owners aware of the problems, and how to combat it? Where is the educational outreach? There are many avenues to make this a successful campaign, whether by mailers, email, social media platforms, and news outlets. The word about tick (and flea) control is essential for animal and human health.

Ivermectin is another product with a track record against ticks and fleas. There are numerous companies with this product and a track record.

"Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (CME) develops after a dog has become infected with _Ehrlichia canis_ bacteria, which are primarily transmitted to dogs through the bites of brown dog ticks (_Rhipicephalus sanguineus_). Brown dog ticks can be found throughout the United States [and Australia] (and worldwide), but are especially problematic in warmer climates, which means that ehrlichiosis is also most frequently diagnosed in these areas.

"Dogs will [usually] appear perfectly normal for 1-3 weeks after being bitten by a tick carrying _E. canis_ bacteria. If the dog is unable to fight off the infection during this time, [the pet] will enter what is known as the acute phase of infection. During this time, the bacteria are actively reproducing within a certain type of white blood cell and are spreading throughout the body. Dogs can display a variety of symptoms during the acute phase of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, including fever, lethargy, poor appetite, lymph node enlargement, abnormal bruising and bleeding, chronic eye inflammation, neurologic abnormalities, and occasionally lameness.

"These [signs] will typically last for 2-4 weeks (occasionally longer - Mod.TG) if left untreated. Many dogs then appear to get better on their own and enter a subclinical phase of the disease, which can last for months to years. During the subclinical phase, blood work may reveal a low platelet count (thrombocytopenia), but otherwise, dogs typically appear to be perfectly normal. Some dogs never progress out of the subclinical phase of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, but others eventually enter the chronic phase of the disease. Signs are similar to those described above for the acute phase, but the longer they go on, the harder they become to treat." (Even dogs in subclinical phases appear to have less energy and frequently require longer or more frequent rest periods. - Mod.TG)

"Another type of ehrlichiosis, called canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis (CGE), is caused by infection with _E. ewingii_ bacteria, which are typically transmitted through the bites of lone star ticks (_Amblyomma americanum_). Lone star ticks are primarily found in the Eastern, Southeastern, and Midwestern parts of the United States.

"The typical signs of CGE are a little different than those that are seen with CME and include fever, lethargy, lameness (common and often appears as stiffness when walking), vomiting, diarrhea, and neurologic abnormalities.

"Whichever form of ehrlichiosis a dog has, it is important your pet be evaluated by a veterinarian as quickly as possible. Diagnosing ehrlichiosis can be somewhat complicated. Many of the signs of ehrlichiosis are indistinguishable from those seen with other diseases like Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme disease, lymphosarcoma, and certain immune disorders. As part of the diagnostic process, most veterinarians will collect a complete health history, perform a thorough physical exam, and then run a complete blood count (CBC), blood chemistry panel, urinalysis, fecal examination, and specific lab work aimed at diagnosing ehrlichiosis.

"Keep in mind the tests commonly used to screen for ehrlichiosis only indicate whether a dog has been exposed to _Ehrlichia_ bacteria, and some dogs are exposed but don't go on to become sick. Therefore, to be definitively diagnosed with ehrlichiosis, a dog should test positive for exposure, have some of the common signs of the disease, and respond to appropriate treatment. Other types of _Ehrlichia_ tests are available to confirm a diagnosis of ehrlichiosis and can be used in complicated cases. (Don't wait to find out how your pet responds. Have the vet send blood to a veterinary diagnostic lab with specific tests available for a diagnosis. - Mod.TG)

"Veterinarians most commonly prescribe the antibiotic doxycycline to treat ehrlichiosis in dogs. It is typically given once a day for 3-4 weeks (or may be given twice daily depending on all conditions of the pet. - Mod.TG). Other medications can also be used when the situation warrants.

"If a dog receives treatment in a timely manner, the condition will usually begin to improve rapidly, oftentimes within just a few days, and the prognosis for complete recovery is good. In more severe cases, additional treatments (such as intravenous fluids, blood transfusions, immunosuppressive medications, and/or pain relievers) may also be necessary.

"Ehrlichiosis is a very serious disease, and dogs having been infected once can develop it again. No vaccine is currently available to protect dogs against ehrlichiosis, although research is being done into developing one. As of now, the best way to prevent dogs from developing ehrlichiosis is to protect them from tick bites. Your veterinarian can recommend the best form of tick prevention based on your dog's health, lifestyle, and the prevalence of ticks and ehrlichiosis in your area."
https://www.petmd.com/dog/parasites/signs-and-symptoms-ehrlichiosis-dogs. - Mod.TG

ProMED map:
Queensland, Australia: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8707124,285]
See Also
Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (QL) dog, ticks 20220202.8701211
2021
----
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (03): (NT) ticks, dog 20210717.8526399
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (02): (VI) dog 20210625.8473477
Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (SA) dog 20210416.8310611
2020
----
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (05): (WA) dog 20201230.8056516
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (04): (NT) dog 20201222.8039768
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (03): (WA) imported dog, testing 20200711.7564789
Ehrlichiosis - Australia (02): (WA) dog, OIE 20200605.7431561
Ehrlichiosis - Australia: (WA) dog 20200603.7424600
and others in the archives
.................................................sb/tg/ao/ml
</body>
