<header id=038097>
Published Date: 2019-10-07 19:48:13 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Silicosis - USA: workers health
Archive Number: 20191007.6712659
</header>
<body id=038097>
SILICOSIS - USA: WORKERS HEALTH
*******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 2 Oct 2019
Source: NPR [edited]
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2019/10/02/766028237/workers-are-falling-ill-even-dying-after-making-kitchen-countertops


Though granite, marble and "engineered stone" all can produce harmful silica dust when cut, ground or polished, the artificial stone typically contains much more silica, says a CDC researcher tracking cases of silicosis. Artificial stone used to make kitchen and bathroom countertops has been linked to cases of death and irreversible lung injury in workers who cut, grind and polish this increasingly popular material.

The fear is thousands of workers in the USA who create countertops out of what's known as "engineered stone" may be inhaling dangerous amounts of lung-damaging silica dust because engineered stone is mostly made of the mineral silica.

[JM], 37, worked for years as a polisher and cutter for a countertop company that sold engineered stone, as well as natural stone like marble. He says dust from cutting the slabs to order was everywhere.

"If you go to the bathroom, it's dust. When we go to take lunch, on the tables, it's dust," he says. "Your nose, your ears, your hair, all your body, your clothes, everything. When you walk out of the shop, you can see your steps on the floor, because of the dust."

Now, he's often weak and dizzy and has pain in his chest. He can no longer play soccer or run around with his kids. Doctors have diagnosed silicosis, a lung disease that can be progressive and has no treatment except for lung transplant. [JM] is scared after hearing 2 other workers from the same company, who were also in their 30s, died of silicosis last year [2018].

"When I go to sleep, I think about it every night, that if I'm going to die in 3 or 4, 5 years?" he says, his voice breaking. "I have 4 kids, my wife. To be honest with you, every day I feel worse. Nothing is getting better."

[JM's] experience is just one of those described in a new report on 18 cases of illness, including 2 deaths, among people who worked principally with engineered stone in California, Colorado, Texas and Washington. The workers were nearly all Hispanic, almost all were men, and most had "severe, progressive disease."

"I am concerned that what we may be seeing here may just be the tip of the iceberg," says Dr. Amy Heinzerling, an epidemic intelligence service officer with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who is assigned to the California Department of Public Health.

Engineered stone took off as a popular option for countertops about a decade ago and is now one of the most common choices for kitchens and bathrooms. From 2010 to 2018, imports of the material rose about 800%.

Manufacturers say the material is preferable to natural stone because it's less likely to crack or stain. Companies make their engineered stone by embedding bits of quartz in a resin binder, and that means it's almost entirely composed of crystalline silica.

"Engineered stone typically contains over 90% silica," says Heinzerling. "Granite, for instance, usually contains less than 45% silica. Marble usually contains less than 10%."

While all this silica isn't a concern once the countertop is installed in a kitchen or bathroom, it is a potential problem for the businesses cutting slabs of this artificial stone to the right shape for customers. "Workers who cut with the stone can be exposed to much higher levels of silica," says Heinzerling, "and I think we're seeing more and more workers who are working with this material who are being put at risk."

A spokesperson for a trade organization representing major manufacturers of engineered stone, A.St.A. World-wide, sent NPR a written statement, noting dust-related diseases can come from unsafe handling of many different materials and "these risks are not specific to engineered stone."

What's more, the statement goes on, engineered stone surfaces "are totally safe in their fabrication and installation if it is performed according to the recommended practices." Manufacturers, according to the trade group, have been working to educate fabricators about these practices.

Still, Heinzerling believes "the fact that all of our affected workers worked with engineered stone, as did many of the workers reported internationally, is really important."

One recent study in Australia found at least 12 percent of workers who cut stone countertops had silicosis. Those cases, and the new cases in the USA, have public health experts now wondering about the nearly 100 000 US workers in this industry.

Officials estimate there are more than 8000 stone fabrication businesses in the USA. Many are small-scale operations perhaps not understanding the dangers of silica or how to control it.

Clusters of silicosis cases, some requiring lung transplants, had already occurred among workers who cut engineered stone in Israel, Italy and Spain when doctors saw the 1st North American case in 2014. That was a 37-year-old Hispanic man who had worked at a countertop company and had been exposed to dust, including dust from engineered stone, for about a decade.

More cases were then discovered in California when public health workers did a routine search of hospital discharge records for a diagnosis of silicosis. They identified a 38-year-old man who had died of silicosis in 2018 after working for a countertop manufacturer.

When they investigated his former workplace, they learned of another worker who had died of silicosis in 2018 at age 36. Four other workers from the same company, including [JM], have been diagnosed with silicosis.

Meanwhile, in Colorado, an unusually high number of people with silicosis were showing up at the occupational health practice of Dr. Cecile Rose, professor of medicine at National Jewish Health and the University of Colorado. "Over a period of less than 18 months, I had seen 7 cases of silicosis in younger workers," says Rose.

In the past, her patients with silicosis tended to be miners, who had dug for metals such as gold and silver many years before. Her new patients were younger and were working with companies that processed slabs of engineered and natural stone.

"We actually not only saw people who were directly cutting and grinding the stone, but we saw people who were just sweeping up the work site after the stone had been cut," says Rose. "They were exposed to the silica particles suspended in the air just with housekeeping duties."

More cases have been found in Texas. And in 2018, public health workers identified a 38-year-old Hispanic man with silicosis in Washington who fabricated countertops. "He is facing serious health issues and is being considered for a lung transplant," according to Washington State Department of Labor & Industries.

None of this surprises David Michaels, an epidemiologist at George Washington University who used to run the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), a safety agency within the Department of Labor. In 2015, he says, OSHA issued a "hazard alert" warning of a significant exposure risk for workers who manufacture natural and artificial stone countertops.

"We knew we'd see more cases," says Michaels. "It's disappointing that OSHA hasn't done anything to stop these cases from occurring. These cases were predictable, and they were preventable."

Prevention basically comes down to controlling the dust. Stone cutting businesses can choose from a variety of proven methods ranging from working with stone while it's wet to using vacuum or filtration systems that remove dust from the air.

In 2016, OSHA issued new workplace limits on how much silica could be in the air. This controversial new rule reduced the permissible exposure level to half of what it had been. Safety experts hailed the new, tighter limit as an important step forward; the previous regulations had been based on decades-old science, they said. But many industry groups opposed it.

A year later, the safety agency's national emphasis program for silica seems to have ended. The program may have allowed OSHA to target the countertop fabrication industry for special inspections, says Michaels. "That way OSHA can have an impact on the entire industry," says Michaels. "But OSHA is not doing that."

Without that program, says Michaels, OSHA is limited in what it can legally do. OSHA can investigate a workplace injury or a complaint. But these workers, some of whom are undocumented immigrants with few employment options, are unlikely to complain.

A spokesperson for OSHA tells NPR that the agency will determine "at a later date" whether a revised silica special emphasis program is needed; in the meantime, the agency "continues to enforce the 2016 silica standard."

"Employers are responsible for providing a safe and healthy workplace free from recognized hazards," the spokesperson says.

Some countertop manufacturers are well aware of the dangers of silica. David Scott, the owner and operator of Slabworks of Montana, in Bozeman, estimates that about 40 percent to 50 percent of what he sells and cuts is the engineered stone. He has been able to dramatically reduce the amount of silica dust in his countertop fabrication shop over the past 5 years, he says.

One of his insurers provided testing for airborne silica, and Scott says levels were initially only marginally acceptable, even though his facility doesn't do any dry processing of stone, which creates more dust. "We were a wet shop at that time, and we were still marginal," he says.

Part of the problem was water with silica dust would end up on the floor, he explains, and some of the water would evaporate before going down the drain. "If you came in in the morning, you would see a white residue on our floor, and that was the dust," says Scott. "So the 1st thing we did was bring in a floor scrubber. We call it our Zamboni."

The machine scrubs and vacuums up the water, and Scott says that reduced the silica load in the air substantially. He then added new air handling systems to further remove dust. "We brought our silica levels, at times, down to undetectable," says Scott.

He says consumers who want to make sure they're buying a countertop from a responsible vendor can vet fabricators by looking to see if they are accredited by the Natural Stone Institute, which trains companies on how to safely cut and polish stone. Accreditation requires companies to basically invite OSHA in to do an inspection.

But many operators, especially smaller ones, won't have gone through this process. If a showroom is attached to a manufacturing shop, Scott says, a countertop buyer could simply look around. "How much dust do you see? Because it gets everywhere," says Scott. "General cleanliness is going to tell you a lot."

In Australia, where government officials are grappling with a spike in aggressive cases of silicosis among workers who cut engineered stone, medical organizations are urging doctors to screen young workers to identify those who have lung disease.

Dr. Graeme Edwards, an occupational health physician in Brisbane, Queensland, says that currently there are more than 250 known cases of silicosis among people who manufacture countertops, or "benchtops," as they are called in Australia.

Anyone who has worked with engineered stone for more than 3 years should have a high-resolution CT scan to check for lung injury, says Edwards, even if they don't have any symptoms. He says this is especially true if they engaged in any dry-cutting of this material for more than a year, regardless of whether they used respiratory protection.

In an email, he says American researchers' assertion in their new report based on Australia's experience, "there might be many more US cases that have yet to be identified" is "a GROSS understatement."

[JM], who is worried about his future, says he wants workers to know the danger is real and they have to protect themselves, because some companies may not care. "At the end, it's your family, it's your health. It's not about other people. It's not about if your boss likes it or not," says [JM]. "If you die, who is going to feed your kids? Who is going to take care of your family?"

[Byline: Nell Greenfieldboyce]

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[This article was likely generated by a recent CDC MMWR report on this problem: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6838a1.htm, (Rose C, Heinzerling A, Patel K, et al). Severe Silicosis in Engineered Stone Fabrication Workers -- California, Colorado, Texas, and Washington, 2017-2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2019;68:813-818. DOI; and the Australian article https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/50/suppl_61/OA484 report on this problem.

A summary from the CDC article:
"What is already known about this topic?
"Respirable crystalline silica exposure causes silicosis, a disabling and sometimes fatal lung disease. Clusters of cases have been reported internationally among stone countertop fabrication workers, but only one U.S. case in this industry has been reported previously.

"What is added by this report?
"Eighteen cases of silicosis, including 2 fatalities, are reported among stone fabrication workers in four states. Several patients also had autoimmune disease and latent tuberculosis infection.

"What are the implications for public health practice?
"Stone fabrication workers, especially those working with engineered stone, are at risk for silicosis. Given the serious health hazard and significant number of workers at risk, additional efforts are needed to reduce exposures and improve disease surveillance."

"Given mounting evidence of silicosis risk among stone fabrication workers, the government of Queensland, Australia, initiated screening in 2018 for all at-risk employees. Ninety-eight cases of silicosis have been identified among 799 workers (12 percent) examined (10). These findings suggest there might be many more U.S. cases having yet to be identified.

"Silicosis is preventable; the cases reported here highlight the urgent need to identify stone fabrication workers at risk and prevent further excess exposure to silica dust. Stone fabrication employers should be aware of this serious risk to their employees' health and ensure that they adequately monitor and control exposures in compliance with the updated silica standards. To identify silicosis among already-exposed workers, employers should conduct required medical surveillance, and both employers and health care providers should notify appropriate public health agencies when cases are identified. State health departments and CDC can work together to standardize and improve public health surveillance for silicosis across jurisdictions. Effective disease surveillance and regulatory enforcement are crucial to address the emerging silicosis threat in the stone fabrication industry."

And the abstract from the aforementioned Australian article by Ryan Hoy also published in the European Respiratory Journal 2017 50: OA484; DOI: 10.1183/1393003.congress-2017.OA484:

Abstract:
"Introduction: Artificial stone is an increasingly popular building material used to produce kitchen and bathroom benchtops. This material has a silica content of greater than 90 percent. Cutting and grinding artificial stone is associated with generation of very high levels of respirable crystalline silica (RCS) and the frequency of cases of severe accelerated silicosis associated with this exposure is increasing rapidly.

Aim: To report the change in respiratory function over time in a clinical series of Australian workers with artificial stone associated silicosis.

Methods: Respiratory physicians voluntarily reported cases of artificial stone associated silicosis identified in their clinical practises. Physicians provided information including occupational histories, respiratory function tests, chest radiology and histopathology reports.

Results: 5 male patients were identified with a median age of 44 years (range 26-57). All were employed in small kitchen and bathroom benchtop fabrication businesses with between 2 and 10 employees. All workplaces primarily used artificial stone. All patients were involved in dry cutting artificial stone. The median duration of exposure prior to symptoms was 7 years (range 4-10). Over a follow up period of 24 months (range 8-47 months), the mean rate of pre-bronchodilator FEV1 decline was 429 ml/year (range 246-788ml) and FVC decline per year was 503 ml/year (range 180-994ml).

Conclusion: The observed rate of lung function decline in this series of Australian workers with artificial stone associated silicosis far exceeds the expected rate of decline in a healthy adult population. Further research regarding this emerging occupational lung disease is urgently required."

For those who may not be aware of precisely what Silicosis is:
"Silicosis is a lung disease caused by breathing in tiny bits of silica, a mineral part of sand, rock, and mineral ores such as quartz. It mostly affects workers exposed to silica dust in occupations such mining, glass manufacturing, stone cutting, and foundry work. Over time, exposure to silica particles causes scarring in the lungs, which can harm your ability to breathe.

Symptoms of silicosis can appear from a few weeks to many years after exposure to silica dust. Symptoms typically worsen over time as scarring in the lungs occurs.

- Acute silicosis, which causes cough, weight loss, and fatigue within a few weeks or years of exposure to inhaled silica.
- Chronic silicosis, which appears 10 to 30 years after exposure and can affect upper lungs and sometimes cause extensive scarring.
- Accelerated silicosis, which occurs within 10 years of high-level exposure.

Silicosis can develop within a few weeks to even decades after exposure. When people breathe silica dust, they inhale tiny particles of the mineral silica. This silica dust can cause fluid buildup and scar tissue in the lungs that cuts down your ability to breathe. This can lead to lung scarring and cough, weight loss, and fatigue.

Silicosis affects the lungs by damaging the lining of the lung air sacs. Once this begins, it leads to scarring and, in some situations, to a condition called progressive massive fibrosis. This condition happens when there is severe scarring and stiffening of the lung, which makes it difficult to breathe.

People with acute silicosis experience cough, weight loss, tiredness, and may have fever or a sharp chest pain. You may also have shortness of breath over time, especially with chronic silicosis. Your healthcare provider might hear crackles or wheezing when they listen to your lungs. Having silicosis increases the risk of other problems, such as tuberculosis, lung cancer, and chronic bronchitis.

Each type of silicosis affects the body somewhat differently:
- In acute silicosis, the lungs become very inflamed and can fill with fluid, which causes severe shortness of breath and low blood oxygen levels.
- In chronic silicosis, the silica dust causes areas of swelling in the lungs and chest lymph nodes, which makes breathing more difficult.
- In accelerated silicosis, swelling in the lungs and symptoms occur faster than in chronic silicosis.

Over time, lung capacity decreases, and people with silicosis may need support with oxygen and other devices to help them breathe.

Symptoms of silicosis can appear from a few weeks to many years after exposure to silica dust. Symptoms typically worsen over time as scarring in the lungs occurs.

Cough is an early symptom and develops over time with exposure to silica that is inhaled.

In acute silicosis, you may experience fever and sharp chest pain along with breathing difficulty. These symptoms can come on suddenly.

In chronic silicosis, you may only have an abnormal chest X-ray in the beginning and then slowly develop a cough and breathing difficulty. More than a third of people with silicosis have phlegm production and cough. Chronic bronchitis-like symptoms may occur, and the lungs have additional sounds called wheezes and crackles. As extensive scarring progresses over time, you may see signs of chronic lung disease such as leg swelling, increased breathing rate, and bluish discoloration of the lips.

There is no cure for silicosis. Prevention is still the best way to avoid the disease. Once silicosis has developed, your doctor will assess the degree of lung damage with tests. Some people may need urgent treatment with oxygen and support for breathing. Others may need medicines to decrease sputum production, such as inhaled steroids. Some may need inhaled bronchodilators, which relax the air tubes.

Once the disease advances, the management is similar to many other chronic lung diseases and needs a multidisciplinary or team approach. To keep the disease from getting worse, it is important to stay away from any additional sources of silica and other lung irritants, such as indoor and outdoor air pollution, allergens and smoke. You may consider counseling to discuss changing occupations.

Acute silicosis may need to be treated with steroids, and a lung transplant may need to be considered."
https://www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/silicosis/diagnosing-treating-silicosis.html

One has to wonder that if there is so much dust why protective breathing apparatus is not provided for the workers. While messy, it sounds like the wet cutting is safer to the lungs than dry cutting. There are likely advantages and disadvantages to both wet and dry cutting of the stones and silicas, but worker protection for inhalation, and eyes as well as hands and feet, would seem to be mandatory for any workers in this situation.

It seems like every state should mandate breathing protection in this industry. - Mod.TG]

.................................................tg/rd/msp/lxl
</body>
