<header id=064097>
Published Date: 2014-06-23 16:21:56 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anthrax - USA (05): CDC laboratory exposure
Archive Number: 20140623.2559920
</header>
<body id=064097>
ANTHRAX - USA (05): CDC LABORATORY EXPOSURE
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Mon 23 Jun 2014
Source: CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) News [edited]
http://www.cbc.ca/news/health/anthrax-lab-director-reassigned-in-u-s-after-incident-1.2684312


The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reassigned the director of the bioterror lab behind the potential anthrax exposure of dozens of scientists and staff, sources told Reuters, as the anthrax controversy intensified. Michael Farrell, head of the CDC's Bioterror Rapid Response and Advanced Technology Laboratory, has been reassigned as the agency investigates the incident, 2 CDC scientists who are not authorized to speak with press told Reuters.

The possible exposure has forced as many as 84 employees at the agency's Atlanta campus to get a vaccine or take powerful antibiotics with known side effects to ward off potentially deadly anthrax disease. [The latest available numbers indicate that 52/54 interviewed workers are taking antibiotics, and 27 have begun the vaccination protocol. - Mod.MHJ]

CDC spokesman Tom Skinner declined to comment on Farrell. Calls and e-mail to Farrell were not returned.

On Friday [20 Jun 2014], the CDC gathered staff at a meeting, where individuals in labs adjacent to the affected areas complained they had not been properly informed about the anthrax incident first discovered on [13 Jun 2014], Skinner said. In a Friday e-mail to staff, CDC Director Dr Thomas Frieden apologized for delays in informing the wider CDC community about lapses in the high-profile bioterror lab. "We waited too long to inform the broader CDC workforce," he wrote in the email obtained by Reuters.

According to the CDC, some time between 6 Jun and 13 Jun 2014, workers in the bioterror lab were trying out a new protocol for killing anthrax before sending the bacteria for use in 2 lower-security CDC labs.

CDC spokesman Skinner on Sunday [22 Jun 2014] said the bioterror lab sent the anthrax bacteria to other labs in closed tubes. The recipients agitated the tubes and then removed the lids, raising concerns that live anthrax could have been released into the air. Both of the CDC scientists Reuters spoke with believe the risk of infection is very slight because only a tiny amount of anthrax was sent out of the bioterror lab. On [18 Jun 2014], a team of CDC scientists used swabs and wipes to take samples from all lab surfaces that might have been contaminated. Skinner said results from the 1st 2 days of tests have been negative, but the CDC will continue watching the samples for another 6 days to see if anything grows.

Dr Paul Meechan, director of the CDC's environmental health and safety compliance office, first disclosed the possible anthrax exposure to Reuters on Thursday [19 Jun 2014].

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Sat 21 Jun 2014
Source: Reuters
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/06/21/us-usa-anthrax-insight-idUSKBN0EW0TJ20140621


The safety breach at a government lab that may have exposed 84 workers to live anthrax centered on a pivotal lapse in procedure: researchers working with the bacteria waited 24 hours to be sure they had killed the pathogens, half the time required by a new scientific protocol.

The lab designed to handle extremely dangerous pathogens at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta unknowingly sent live samples of anthrax to labs with fewer safeguards, where the exposure occurred. No one has died or fallen ill but dozens are being treated with a vaccine and powerful antibiotics to keep them from becoming sick.

The exposure incident is unprecedented in the history of American research on bioweapons and other deadly pathogens, prompting alarm among researchers who have already warned about the consequences of lax laboratory oversight globally. Scientists in and out of the CDC say the process of handling such bacteria and viruses must be improved. Investigation of the safety lapses are under way, but an initial review of events at the 1st lab, called a biosafety level 3 facility, or BSL-3, suggests that multiple procedures were violated, Reuters has learned.

Scientists at the CDC bioterror lab were preparing anthrax for 2 laboratories developing quicker methods to detect spores, such as those sent through the US postal service in 2001 that killed 5 people. The researchers were supposed to kill the anthrax, since the 2 other labs were not equipped to work with live bacteria. The protocol for killing anthrax using a new chemical process required that they put the sample in an incubator, and wait at least 48 hours to check for signs of life. Instead, the wait ended after 24 hours. They "didn't see any new growth," said Dr Paul Meechan, director of the CDC's environmental health and safety compliance office, said in an interview. "At that point, they assumed the material was safe."

"We know that was a mistake," said agency spokesman Tom Skinner. "What else, I don't know."

A week later, scientists in the same lab that prepared the original samples discovered live anthrax growing in lab dishes left in an incubator, kicking off a scramble to contain the exposure. The lapse was also noteworthy because the new method of using chemicals instead of radiation to kill the anthrax may not have been validated by rigorous testing to make sure it works. "That's also a problem," Skinner said. "But the investigation we're going through will tell us that."

Because the chemical method is less studied, "it would have been prudent to handle the samples as if they were live organisms," said Stephen Morse of the Columbia University Institutional Biosafety Committee and former program manager for biodefense at the Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).

The breach likely involved more than one person: when one researcher is working with a microbe such as anthrax, a 2nd person is required to observe. That is to both insure against any unintentional divergence from proper lab procedure and to detect intentional breaches, such as a worker trying to smuggle out a deadly agent. Meechan repeatedly used a plural pronoun, "they", describing more than one person's involvement. The CDC has not identified the researcher or researchers involved. ["They" is also used to hide the sex of a single individual. - Mod.MHJ]

Pattern of problems
-------------------
The anthrax breach is already the subject of 2 investigations: one led internally by CDC and a 2nd by the US Department of Agriculture. At least 2 Congressional committees are monitoring developments to see if public hearings are warranted. The lapse "is not an isolated incident, but instead is part of a continuing pattern of biosafety and biosecurity problems at the CDC," said Richard Ebright, a molecular biologist and biodefense expert at Rutgers University who for years has raised concerns about biosafety labs. "Audit after audit, and incident after incident, has documented biosafety and biosecurity training lapses, equipment failures, and procedural violations at the CDC."

In 2012, for instance, the US House Energy and Commerce Committee launched an investigation into safety lapses at CDC's Building 18, where this month's [June 2014] anthrax breach occurred. The labs there had chronic problems with airflow systems designed to contain infectious agents, the committee found. Labs are supposed to have lower pressure than outside rooms, so that air flows in when a door opens, as well as air filters to trap dangerous microbes. At least once, a failure of this safety system sent unfiltered air out into the corridor. No cases of infection were reported.

A 2010 report by the inspector general of the US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC's parent agency, found the Atlanta labs did not always restrict access properly to pathogens that threaten public health, compromising the "physical security" of the bacteria. The inspector general also found that CDC did not always obtain "approval to transfer select agents or ensure that only approved individuals accepted delivery of select agents."

How to fix
----------
Despite the breach, a dozen experts contacted by Reuters still spoke highly of CDC's biosafety record. They say the lapse there may be a lesson that other top level labs are even more at risk. "There are a lot of places where BSL-3 labs are not in very good shape," said UPMC's [University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Center for Health Security] Dr DA Henderson, who was acting director of the Office of Public Health Emergency Preparedness following the 2001 anthrax attacks.

"Clearly something needs to be altered," said CDC spokesman Skinner.

One change could be to extend the strictest biosafety measures even to labs working with less-dangerous pathogens. If the labs receiving the anthrax had required researchers to wear more personal protective gear, such as a respirator, exposure would have been diminished. "When people think they're working with inactive agents, they still need to act with at least a grain of suspicion that the samples might not be inactivated," said Morse. "It's a lot of hassle working in personal protection equipment," he said, "but an incident like this tells us that even if you think something is inactivated or safe you should err on the side of caution."

The 2-person rule clearly didn't work, either, and should be revised, said Lynn Klotz, a biosecurity expert at the Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation in Washington. "It's very boring to observe what another person is doing and the 2nd person can get sloppy," he said.

Additional controls that use technology to back up human oversight could reduce the chances of the accidental or intentional release of anthrax or a more contagious microbe that could harm a much wider population if it left the lab.

"If this had been a highly contagious bird flu that they were working with instead of anthrax, I'd be scared to death," Klotz said.

[Byline: Sharon Begley, Julie Steenhuysen; editing: Michele Gershberg, Peter Henderson]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[And yet many people over decades have managed to safely handle _Bacillus anthracis_ without significant accidents, knowing that vials will always get dropped. The commonest problem I know of is of spillage in high speed centrifuges and that can initiate an aerosol. And please always handle Sterne with the greatest of care. It is a perennial 'flyer' and a cross-contaminant in far too many laboratories. Over the many years my Special Pathogens BSL 2+ Laboratory was functioning we wiped down after every completed protocol and at 3 pm every Friday. The only contamination we ever found, and we checked routinely, was on the door handle of the refrigerator. The grad student working in the laminar flow cabinet would swivel on their stool from the cabinet to the refrigerator to put something away and forget to first replace their plastic gloves. All the other usual suspects -- laminar flow cabinet, bench surfaces, floor, centrifuge, telephone, laboratory door handle -- were clean. First and last surface contamination found. If we could maintain this standard and we processed hundreds of anthrax cultures, others can. Apropos, a tip I learnt from George Harper, the safety officer at Porton [Porton Down is a United Kingdom government military science park] for many years, is that if you want to know what pathogens a laboratory is handling, swab the door handle. You don't need to go in. - Mod.MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax - USA (04): CDC laboratory exposure 20140620.2554615
Anthrax - USA (03): CDC laboratory exposure 20140619.2552800
.................................................mhj/mj/jw
</body>
