<header id=063595>
Published Date: 2011-10-13 13:07:56 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis - Pakistan: surveillance, 2009-2011
Archive Number: 20111013.3066
</header>
<body id=063595>
HEPATITIS - PAKISTAN: SURVEILLANCE, 2009 TO 2011
************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 14 Oct 2011
Source: MMWR Weekly, Volume 60, No. 40 ,40);1385-1390 [abridged &
edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6040a3.htm?s_cid=mm6040a3_e&source=govdelivery


Hepatitis A is thought to infect almost all persons living in Pakistan
by age 15 years (1), and hepatitis E is responsible for sporadic
infections and outbreaks (2). The prevalence of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection is estimated at 2.5 percent and the prevalence of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, estimated at 4.8 percent, is one of
the highest rates in the world (3). Hepatitis surveillance in Pakistan
has been syndromic, failing to confirm infection, distinguish among
viruses, or collect information on risk factors. To understand the
epidemiology of viral hepatitis in Pakistan more clearly, the Ministry
of Health (MOH) asked the Pakistan Field Epidemiology and Laboratory
Training Program (FELTP) to establish a hepatitis sentinel
surveillance system in 5 large public hospitals in 4 provinces and
Islamabad Capital Territory. This report describes the implementation
of the viral hepatitis surveillance system in Pakistan and summarizes
major findings from June 2010 through March 2011.

A total of 712 cases of viral hepatitis were reported; newly reported
HCV infection accounted for 53.2 percent of reported cases, followed
by acute hepatitis A (19.8 percent), acute hepatitis E (12.2 percent),
and newly reported HBV infection (10.8 percent). A history of
healthcare-related exposures, particularly receipt of therapeutic
injections and infusions, commonly were reported by persons infected
with HBV and HCV, and most patients reported drinking un-boiled water.
These findings point to the need for improved provider and community
education about risks associated with unsafe injections, strengthening
infection control practices in health facilities, increasing hepatitis
B vaccination coverage, and improving access to clean drinking water
in Pakistan.

In August 2009, to monitor the effectiveness of the National Program
for Hepatitis Prevention and Control (NPHPC)'s activities and guide
implementation of evidence-based prevention interventions, the
Pakistan FELTP launched a hepatitis sentinel site surveillance system
in collaboration with CDC's Division of Viral Hepatitis. Criteria for
site selection were based on geographic distribution, patient load,
capacity for laboratory testing, ability to conduct data entry, and
capacity for transmitting viral hepatitis data to the National
Institute of Health in Islamabad, where FELTP is housed. Five public
sector tertiary-care hospitals, located in 4 provincial headquarters
(Lahore, Peshawar, Karachi, and Quetta) and in Islamabad (the federal
capital), were selected as sentinel sites for viral hepatitis
surveillance. The hepatitis surveillance system was fully operational
by June 2010.

During June 2010-March 2011, a total of 712 cases of viral hepatitis
were reported by the 5 sentinel sites. Newly reported hepatitis C was
the most common cause of viral hepatitis, accounting for 53.2 percent
of cases, followed by acute hepatitis A (19.8 percent), acute
hepatitis E (12.2 percent), and newly reported hepatitis B (10.8
percent). In addition, among patients, 28 (3.9 percent) had evidence
of HBV and HCV co-infection, and 11 (14.3 percent) of those with HBV
infection had evidence of co-infection with hepatitis D virus
infection [which may have enhanced the HBV infection - Mod.CP].

Most persons reported with viral hepatitis resided near the reporting
hospital, all of which were in large cities. For all types of viral
hepatitis, nearly twice as many cases were reported among males than
females. Most reported cases occurred among persons aged 20-39 years
(365 cases; 53.3 percent), although some variation occurred by type of
hepatitis. Of 24 women with acute hepatitis E infection, 75 percent
were of childbearing age (15-49 years), but information regarding
pregnancy status was unavailable. Hospitalization rates ranged from
7.1 percent for acute hepatitis A infection to 10.4 percent for newly
reported HBV infection. No deaths were reported among persons with any
type of viral hepatitis. Of the 25 persons with any type of hepatitis
who reported being vaccinated against HBV, 2 (8 percent) were aged 5
years or under, 3 (12 percent) were aged 6-19 years, and 20 (80
percent) were aged 20 years or older. Of the 13 hepatitis cases
reported among children aged 5 years or under, only 2 of the children
previously were vaccinated against HBV, including one child with newly
reported HBV infection.

Drinking un-boiled water during the past 6 months was commonly
reported by persons with all types of viral hepatitis. HBV-infected
case patients reported having undergone surgery and dental procedures,
exposure to therapeutic injections, intravenous infusions, and skin
piercing more commonly than did those with other types of viral
hepatitis.

MMWR Editorial Note:

This report describes the establishment of the 1st sentinel
surveillance system for viral hepatitis in Pakistan. Findings indicate
that all types of viral hepatitis are highly prevalent in Pakistan,
with newly reported HCV infection being the most frequently reported
in this system. Continued transmission of enteric viral hepatitis A
and E in Pakistan, as revealed by sentinel surveillance, can be
attributed to lack of sanitation. Because most drinking water in
Pakistan is contaminated, persons are encouraged to boil their
drinking water. However, as revealed by sentinel surveillance, the
majority of persons infected with any type of viral hepatitis reported
drinking un-boiled water, likely because of practicality and cost.

Previous studies indicated that almost all persons living in Pakistan
have been infected with hepatitis A virus by age 15 years (1).
Although acute hepatitis A is usually a self-limited asymptomatic or
mild illness in children, it can cause severe symptoms in adults.
Reports of acute hepatitis A infections among persons aged over 30
years might demonstrate an epidemiologic shift in age of infection,
likely resulting from improved sanitation in some areas. Similar
findings have been reported in a recent systematic review, which
suggested a decrease in hepatitis A endemicity in the South Asia
region that includes Pakistan (5). Furthermore, high prevalence of
acute hepatitis E infection among women of childbearing age is an
indicator of frequent exposure in a population at high risk for
mortality from infection. These data underscore the need for improved
access to safe drinking water in Pakistan to decrease hepatitis A and
E transmission.

Surveillance data also revealed that despite initiation of childhood
hepatitis B vaccination in 2002, the majority of children with
hepatitis reported to the surveillance system were not vaccinated, and
cases of HBV infection were reported among persons aged under 10
years, including children aged 5 years or less. In Pakistan, the 1st
dose of hepatitis B vaccine is given at age 6 weeks as part of the
pentavalent vaccine, which provides immunization against diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis, HBV, and _Haemophilus influenzae_ type b
infections. Three-dose vaccine coverage in 2009 was reported to be
over 85 percent among children aged 12-23 months, although the
demographic and health survey conducted in 2005 reported a coverage of
57 percent (6). Based on the findings in this report and the coverage
survey data, routine coverage needs to be improved, and implementation
of the hepatitis B birth dose to prevent infection among infants
should be considered.

Data obtained through this system point to several potential
opportunities to improve viral hepatitis control and prevention,
particularly in injection safety and infection control. Consistent
with previous studies, HBV and HCV infections were associated with a
history of medical injections and procedures, suggesting that unsafe
injection practices and health-care procedures contribute to
transmission of HBV and HCV in Pakistan (3,4,7), although these
practices also were commonly reported among hepatitis A and E
patients. Use of therapeutic injections is a common practice in
Pakistan, with an estimated 4-8 injections per person per year, one of
the highest rates in the world (4). These injections frequently are
unnecessary and are administered for common, minor complaints such as
fever and fatigue (4). The high demand for these injections is driven
by the popular but erroneous belief that medications administered by
injection are more effective than those given orally and by economic
incentives for health-care providers, who can charge patients more for
medicines administered by injection (8). In Pakistan, injections often
are given by unqualified practitioners using un-sterile syringes,
which increases the risk for transmission of blood-borne infections,
including viral hepatitis (4,7). Addressing unsafe injections is
essential to curb the ongoing epidemic of HCV infection in this
country.

Since 2000, a significant increase in injection drug use also has been
reported in Pakistan (9), and high prevalence rates of HCV infection
have been reported among injection drug users (IDUs) (60-93 percent)
(4). However, only one case of hepatitis C reported through the
surveillance system involved a reported IDU. This finding might be
explained by the social stigma associated with admitting to such a
behavior.

This report is subject to at least 4 limitations. 1st, because
sentinel hospital sites are public hospitals located in large cities,
the catchment population for the surveillance sites mainly includes
the urban poor. Persons with acute hepatitis who seek care in the
private sector and sites run by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
which account for 70 percent of health-care services in Pakistan and
provide services for high-risk groups (e.g., IDUs, men who have sex
with men, and persons with human immunodeficiency virus) (10) might
not be captured in this surveillance system. 2nd, surveillance data
only represent persons who came to a health-care facility and received
viral hepatitis testing; infected persons with mild disease not
requiring medical attention or lacking access to or failing to receive
medical care were not included, leading to a likely underreporting of
the number of persons with hepatitis infection. 3rd, because of
resource constraints and lack of diagnostic capabilities,
immunoglobulin M antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (IgM anti-HBc)
testing was not available, which limited the ability to distinguish
acute from chronic HBV infection; identification of HBV infections was
therefore solely based on acute symptoms and elevation of liver
enzymes, along with positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and
total anti-HBc. Similarly, lack of confirmatory testing using high
signal-to-cut-off ratios, nucleic acid testing, or recombinant
immunoblot assay for cases of HCV infection reported to the
surveillance system, based on positive ELISA test results, might have
led to an overestimation of the number of newly reported HCV
infections. Finally, the associations between risk factors and
hepatitis infections might be confounded by differences in the age
distribution of persons with various types of hepatitis infection.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Among the significant observations obtained from this surveillance
exercise are the following. Almost all persons living in Pakistan have
been infected with hepatitis A virus by age 15 due mainly to the
universal habit of drinking un-boiled water. Hepatitis E remains
sporadic, however. During the period June 2010 to March 2011, HCV
infection became the most frequent newly reported infection. And
despite initiation of childhood hepatitis B vaccination in 2002, the
majority of children with hepatitis reported to the surveillance
system had not been vaccinated. In Pakistan, injections are given
often by unqualified practitioners using un-sterile syringes, which
increases the risk for transmission of blood-borne infections, such as
viral hepatitis B, C and D. Curbing this practice would help to stem
the ongoing epidemic of HCV infection in this country.

The original unabridged text includes a figure displaying the
geographic distribution of the reported viral hepatitis cases by virus
type. Interested readers should consult the original document at the
source URL to view the full text and references cited.

The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Pakistan can be accessed
at: http://healthmap.org/r/1iGJ. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2010
----
Hepatitis A - Pakistan: (JK) 20101206.4367
2009
----
Hepatitis, viral - Pakistan (04): (SD) prisoners 20091125.4045
Hepatitis, viral - Pakistan (03), syringe re-use 20090920.3304
Hepatitis, viral - Pakistan (02): prevalence 20090610.2141
Hepatitis, viral - Pakistan: (SD) fatal 20090609.2125
2008
----
Hepatitis B & C - Pakistan (02): (SD) 20081203.3804
Hepatitis B & C - Pakistan: (SD) 20081201.3773
2007
----
HIV/AIDS & hepatitis, barbers - Pakistan (Islamabad) 20070521.1630
Hepatitis, viral - Pakistan 20070306.0796
2006
----
Hepatitis B and C, barbers - Pakistan (Islamabad) (02) 20061216.3536
Hepatitis B and C, barbers - Pakistan (Islamabad) 20061215.3529
2004
----
Hepatitis - Pakistan (Punjab): RFI 20040609.1546
.................................................cp/msp/mpp
</body>
