<header id=049558>
Published Date: 2014-11-11 21:16:29 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Leptospirosis - Japan: (ON) military
Archive Number: 20141112.2947035
</header>
<body id=049558>
LEPTOSPIROSIS - JAPAN: (OKINAWA) MILITARY
*****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 3 Nov 2014
Source: Marine Corps Times [edited]
<marinecorpstimes.com/story/military/pentagon/2014/11/03/oki-marines-fall-ill-after-training-in-murky-waters/18402307/>


Corps officials have closed off a portion of the jungle warfare training center in Okinawa, Japan, thought to be contaminated with a bacterium that has left dozens of marines sick.

Over the past 2 months, about 90 marines are suspected to have contracted a rare illness called leptospirosis, which can turn serious if left untreated. So far, more than half of those cases were confirmed to be caused by the bacterial infection, which can cause chills, nausea, fever, vomiting, headaches and other flu-like symptoms.

Normally, military medical teams on Okinawa see a few cases of the disease each year, said Lt Cmdr Joy Dierks, the surgeon and preventive medicine officer for the III Marine Expeditionary Force. But when a slew [a large number. - Mod.SH] of marines were reporting similar symptoms, she said they began to suspect there was a common thread. "Whenever there is a large group of people who have the same things, it is a sign," Dierks said.

The marines getting sick were all found to have attended the Jungle Warfare Training Center at Camp Gonsalves. The illness varied from marine to marine. Some were sent to an intensive care unit, and 3 had their gallbladders removed, she said. The need for time in the operating room was so high that Naval Hospital Okinawa canceled elective surgeries in order to free the facilities for sick leptospirosis patients.

Others with less severe symptoms are cured with antibiotics, and doxycycline or azithromycin -- often called a "Z-Pak" -- are prescribed. It typically takes about a week to recover, Dierks said. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also list penicillin as an effective treatment, according to its website.

CDC includes military [personnel] on a list of people most at risk of contracting the bacteria that cause the disease. The agency also warns that without treatment, the illness can cause kidney damage, meningitis, liver failure, breathing problems. It may also be fatal.

Dierks said one military working dog was euthanized after it fell ill with leptospirosis. For now, the training area remains off limits, she said.

Dogs, wild pigs, mongooses and other animals are believed to be behind a series of leptospirosis cases on Okinawa. Animals infected with the leptospira bacteria are thought to have urinated in a waterway that Marines use for jungle warfare training, getting the service members sick as well. "Basically, they pee in the pool, as we say," Dierks said. In this case, the pool is a pond at the Jungle Warfare Training Center. It's used as a mucky obstacle in a training course and when marines go through the soupy mess, the bacteria inadvertently enter cuts, their mouths and their nostrils, causing them to contract the bacteria and fall ill.

It's not known why there have been so many cases this year [2014], but military healthcare providers, army veterinarians and Okinawa government health officials are trying to figure it out. Dierks said she expects the number of new cases to end later this year as temperatures cool. This problem hasn't only affected Camp Gonsalves and the Jungle Warfare Training Center. Okinawan health officials have also seen a rash of cases amongst locals who use a nearby swimming hole as well, she said.

Symptoms typically appear between 2 days and 4 weeks after a person is exposed to a contaminated water source, according to CDC. Dierks said that it often takes longer for patients who took preventative antibiotics to develop symptoms if their prophylactic medicine regimen fails to work.

Marines who were scheduled to use the watery obstacle were given antibiotics in an attempt to stop them from contracting the disease. For now, however, the obstacle isn't being used for training, and it's off limits for Junglefest 2014, a public tour of the training facility, Dierks said.

While they took the outbreak seriously, it's not a new disease. Leptospira can be found around the world and has caused outbreaks before, including one on Okinawa in 1987. Still, the 27 year gap has left them a bit stumped. "There's nothing new looking at it historically here; there just haven't been a lot of cases," Dierks said. "So why all of a sudden now?"

Okinawan health officials suspect the weather might have something to do with this year's [2014] uptick and are consulting with meteorologists to get weather and rainfall data so they can figure out whether there were unique conditions that helped the bacteria thrive. They've also enacted a series of new initiatives designed to prevent future outbreaks. Efforts include:

- field treatment. Since the bacteria can be found all over the world, military medical personnel are trying to find the best way to prevent people from falling ill during a real operation, and, if they do become sick, the best way to treat them in a field setting. Dierks said their biggest effort is to prevent illnesses on the battlefield.

- animal care. Military working dogs are being inoculated with a leptospira vaccine specifically for versions of the bacterium found in Japan.

- staying clean. Marines are encouraged to change their soaked uniforms and quickly clean them. During training, they're sprayed with a fire hose. But Dierks said they're looking into whether a gentler wash might reduce the likelihood that contaminated water is blasted into the mouth. Proper hand hygiene helps prevent the spread of many illnesses, but doesn't do much to prevent human-to-human transmission of leptospira bacteria. The bug can't survive long on dry surfaces, so poor hand-washing habits don't have much impact on transmission.

- prevention. They're evaluating the best antibiotic regimen to administer before exposure to potentially contaminated water. They're trying to find the best way to prevent the illness.

- possible immunity. They're evaluating how people develop antibodies to leptospira. Medical studies show that 20 per cent of people in Cambodia don't fall ill from the germ, and they're looking to see whether some marines, particularly ones that have been through the jungle warfare center course previously, or instructors who spend months there, have developed an immunity.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[Leptospirosis is a zoonotic spirochetal infection that is distributed widely throughout the world. Although leptospirosis is commoner in tropical areas, it is also found in temperate areas. It is transmitted to humans by direct contact of abraded skin or mucous membranes with the urine of infected animals or by contact with wet soil, vegetation, or water that has been contaminated with infected animal urine. These animals are mostly asymptomatic but chronically infected with one of the several hundred serovars of the spirochete leptospira. Many species of wild and domestic animals (including rodents, dogs, cattle, and swine) are susceptible to chronic urinary infection with leptospira. In carrier animals with chronic renal infections, leptospiruria persists for long periods or for life, and leptospira bacteria shed in urine may survive in water or moist soil for weeks to months.

Outbreaks frequently follow heavy rainfalls, flooding with fresh water, and increasing rodent numbers. Leptospirosis is an occupational hazard for people who work outdoors or with animals, for example, farmers, sewer workers, veterinarians, dairy farmers, and rice and sugarcane field workers. It is a recreational hazard for those who participate in outdoor water sports such as swimming, rowing, or whitewater rafting in contaminated lakes and rivers.

Military personnel are also considered at risk for exposure to _Leptospira_ spp. because of field activities during exercises and deployment in endemic countries.

The following 8 references illustrate outbreaks of the infection in military personnel around the world, including Okinawa, Japan:

1. Tan DS, Lopes DA. A preliminary study of the status of leptospirosis in the Malaysian Armed forces. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1972;3(2):208-11.
2. Allen GL, Weber DR, Russell PK. The clinical picture of leptospirosis in American soldiers in Vietnam. Mil Med. 1968;133(4):275-80.
3. Mackenzie RB, Reiley CG, Alexander AD, et al. An outbreak of leptospirosis among U. S. army troops in the Canal Zone. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1966;15(1):57-63.
4. Corwin A, Ryan A, Bloys W, et al. A waterborne outbreak of leptospirosis among United States military personnel in Okinawa, Japan. Int J Epidemiol. 1990;19(3):743-8, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/19.3.743.
5. Olson JG, Irving GS, Bourgeois AL, et al. Seroepidemiological evidence of infectious diseases in United States Marine Corps personnel, Okinawa, Japan, 1975--1976. Mil Med. 1979;144:175-6.
6. Johnston JH, Lloyd J, McDonald J, Waitkins S. Leptospirosis--an occupational disease of soldiers. J R Army Med Corps. 1983;129(2):111-4.
7. Russell KL, Montiel Gonzalez MA, et al. An outbreak of leptospirosis among Peruvian military recruits. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2003;69(1):53-7.
8. Hadad E, Pirogovsky A, Bartal C, et al. An outbreak of leptospirosis among Israeli troops near the Jordan River. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2006;74(1):127-31.

Although vaccines are available for immunizing other animals against leptospirosis, no vaccine against leptospirosis is available for use in humans.

The Jungle Warfare Training Center, 17 500 acres (71 sq km) of jungle, provides expert instruction to prepare Marine and Joint Forces for the rigors of combat in a dense jungle environment. It is located in Camp Gonsalves, in Northern Okinawa, Japan (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camp_Gonsalves).

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2947035,156. - Mod.ML]
See Also
2011
---
Leptospirosis - Malaysia: (Selangor) military 20111204.3531
2005
---
Leptospirosis, military personnel - Australia (QLD) 20050322.0824
2004
---
Leptospirosis, military personnel - Guam 20040427.1176
.................................................ml/msp/sh
</body>
