<header id=033657>
Published Date: 2018-12-02 17:49:59 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Rat bite fever - USA: (CT)
Archive Number: 20181202.6172872
</header>
<body id=033657>
RAT BITE FEVER - USA: (CONNECTICUT)
***********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 29 Nov 2018
Source: The New York Times [edited]
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/29/magazine/a-rash-on-her-palms-and-the-bottoms-of-her-feet-was-the-clue-that-turned-the-case.html


"We're going to the hospital," the mother said to her 24-year-old daughter. The young woman had been crying in pain all night -- and for the past 3 weeks. Her symptoms started with a couple of days of nonstop vomiting and a fever of 103 deg F [39.4 deg C]. The vomiting stopped, but the fever continued. Then she broke out in a rash on her hands and feet. That's when the pain started. First her right knee became stiff and swollen. Then her wrists and ankles. And soon after that, everything hurt.

This was so unlike her daughter. The mother had never seen her in this kind of pain. An avid equestrienne for most of her life, the young woman had gritted her teeth through sprained wrists and ankles, horse-trodden feet and, last year [2017], a fracture.

She helped her daughter out of bed, then hurried to get dressed. They made their way in the predawn light to the emergency room at nearby Yale New Haven Hospital. She'd already taken her daughter to the E.R. once that week. That was after a few visits to urgent care and the woman's primary-care doctor.

The doctor at urgent care thought she had some kind of virus. Her primary-care doctor gave it a name: hand-foot-mouth disease -- a common viral illness seen mostly in young children. It usually lasted less than 10 days, so she would probably start feeling better soon, he told the patient.

But she didn't. Every day she felt worse. The pain in her joints was incapacitating. Walking was nearly impossible, and her wrists and hands were so sore she couldn't type on her phone. When she didn't get better, her doctor sent off blood tests to look for the coxsackievirus, the most common cause of hand-foot-mouth disease, as well as other possibilities. The tests indicated that she didn't have any of the usual tick-borne infections. And it wasn't rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. The coxsackievirus test would take a while, but the doctor assured her that it was the most likely diagnosis.

When the young woman read up on hand-foot-mouth disease, she just couldn't believe that was what she had. It was supposed to last a little over a week; she was deep into the 2nd week and still felt more miserable every day. Most kids with this virus had a low-grade fever, but hers was still high, even when taking ibuprofen and acetaminophen. Finally, most people with hand-foot-mouth disease had sores in their mouths and only mild joint pain. She didn't have any sores in her mouth, and her joint pain was intense, despite the powerful painkillers her doctor prescribed.

In the emergency room, the patient was given an anti-inflammatory medication called Toradol and prednisone for her joint pain. It helped a little, but she was still so uncomfortable that she couldn't walk. The decision was made to admit her to the hospital to treat her pain.

That evening, the patient was seen by Dr Sonali Advani, an infectious-disease physician. She introduced herself to the patient and her mother, then sat down. "Tell me everything that happened," she said.

She listened as the woman described the pain and fever of the past few weeks. Her hands and feet were dotted with blisters -- filled with pus or blood. At first, they itched, the young woman told her. But now they just hurt. What struck Advani about the rash was that it spread to the soles of her feet and the palms of her hands. Because the skin there is different than that found any other place on the body, only a very few kinds of rashes appear there. The rash that accompanied hand-foot-mouth disease was one, but not the only one.

She told the women that she would be back in the morning and went to look at the patient's chart. There were possibilities that hadn't been investigated. She wrote her recommendations, including tests for other diseases.

The next morning, Advani returned to see the patient. She had questions about the animals she was exposed to in the barn where the horses she rode were kept. The young woman thought for a moment. She saw the horses every day. There were chickens, but they weren't in the barn. Oh, and there were 2 new kittens.

That caught Advani's attention. Had she been scratched or bitten by the kittens? No, they weren't house cats, the young woman replied; they were barn cats, there to catch rats.

Were there rats in the barn? Yes. Had she been bitten by one? No, she answered. And then she hesitated. A few days before she got sick, she had seen what she thought was a baby mouse in the middle of the road. She worried that it might get run over, so she picked it up and moved it. It gave her a little nibble, which barely broke the skin. She doused it with hydrogen peroxide, and the mark disappeared within a couple of days.

Advani felt a burst of excitement. She looked at the mother, who had her computer open. Advani asked her to look up rat-bite fever. The Centers for Disease Control provided a list of the symptoms, which the mother read: fever, vomiting, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, rash -- everything her daughter had been experiencing.

Rat-bite fever is rare in the United States because we have limited exposure to rodents, who are the carriers of this infection. But the disease is seen in those who work with rats in a lab or pet shop or those who keep them as pets. In this country, the infection is usually caused by a bacterium called _Streptobacillus moniliformis_, which can be transmitted by rodents. Without treatment, nearly one in 8 who get this infection will die.

The medical team caring for the patient was skeptical. Rat-bite fever was so rare that most of them had never heard of it. Moreover, the test for the coxsackievirus had come back positive. It was much more likely that she had an unusually bad case of hand-foot-mouth disease. When the team went to see the patient later that day, they put on the required protective gear -- gown, gloves, and mask -- to prevent transmission of the coxsackievirus from patient to doctor.

The patient told them she was pretty sure she had rat-bite fever. She told them about her close encounter with the baby rat. She pulled up the CDC web page with all her symptoms. She showed them the pictures of the matching rash. The medical team was persuaded -- so much so that they took off their face masks. This was a disease that couldn't be transmitted human to human.

One important question remained: If she had rat-bite fever, why would she test positive for coxsackievirus? There are more than 20 strains of coxsackievirus that can cause disease. It turned out she had antibodies to a strain that doesn't cause hand-foot-mouth disease, the only coxsackie infection to cause the palm-and-sole rash. And because the test measures antibodies and not the bug itself, it can't distinguish between current and past infections.

She also tested positive for the rat-bite-fever bacterium. Before the result came back, she was started on the recommended 6 weeks of intravenous penicillin. She finished treatment this fall [2018] and is back to training and riding horses.

How did this young doctor make a diagnosis that eluded so many others? Advani told me that she missed a question on a test she took to prepare for the infectious-diseases boards. That question involved a young woman with fever and a rash on her palms who was exposed to animals in a pet store. She had rat-bite fever. The number of infections that can cause this rash is small, Advani's teacher told her. She should learn that list. So Advani did. And when she saw this young woman and heard about her exposure to rats, she immediately recalled that other young woman and rat-bite fever.

[Byline: Lisa Sanders]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Rat-bite fever (RBF) is an infectious disease caused by 2 different bacteria:
- _Streptobacillus moniliformis_, the only reported bacterium that causes RBF in North America (streptobacillary RBF)
- _Spirillum minus_, common in Asia (spirillary RBF, also known as sodoku)

Symptoms and signs of streptobacillary RBF include: fever, vomiting, headache, muscle pain, joint pain or swelling (about 5 in 10 people with RBF have this), rash (occurs in about 3 out of 4 people with RBF). Symptoms usually begin 3 to 10 days after contact with the bacteria, but can be delayed as long as 3 weeks. By this time, any rodent bite or scratch wound that caused the infection has usually healed.

Transmission
------------
_Streptobacillus moniliformis_ and _Spirillum minus_ are commensal organisms that are part of the normal respiratory flora of rodents. Bacteria can be found in the oral, nasal, and conjunctival secretions, as well as animal urine. Either organism may be transmitted to humans through broken skin, bites, or scratches. Infection can also result from close contact with an infected rodent (without a reported bite or scratch); [_Streptobacillus moniliformis_ can be transmitted by] ingestion of food or drink that have been contaminated with the bacterium. Infection that occurs as a result of ingestion is known as Haverhill fever, after a large bacterial outbreak that occurred in Haverhill, Massachusetts, in 1926, linked to contaminated unpasteurized milk products.

People at higher risk for RBF
-----------------------------
Any person who comes into contact with the bacteria that cause RBF is at risk for becoming sick with the disease. Remember, without early diagnosis and appropriate treatment, RBF can cause severe disease and death.

People who may be at greater risk for RBF infection include:
- those who have pet rats or other rodents in their home;
- people who have live or frozen feeder rats or other rodents in their home;
- people who have been bitten or scratched by a rat or other rodent;
- those who work with rats or other rodents, such as at animal research laboratories or pet stores;
- people who live or spend time in areas with rodent infestations;
- children who have contact with rodents;
- children 5 years old or younger are at higher risk for infection with RBF because their immune systems may still be developing. Additionally, they are less likely to know how often they need to wash their hands, and how to properly do so. Infants and young children may place unclean fingers in their mouths or contaminate common household objects; and
- adults ages 65 and older, women who are pregnant, or those with weakened immune systems who have difficulty fighting off infections (for example, people with cancer, HIV/AIDS, organ implants, or those taking certain medications such as steroids).

If you have any of the symptoms of RBF after contact with rats or other rodents, immediately see your health care provider. Make sure to tell your provider about your contact with rodents.

[Streptobacillary RBF is the predominant form of the disease seen in the United States, in which the bite site, if present, typically heals quickly, with minimal residual inflammation and without significant regional lymphadenopathy; whereas spirillary RBF (sodoku) occurs primarily in Asia and the bite site becomes indurated and may ulcerate, with associated regional lymphadenopathy. In streptobacillary RBF, migratory polyarthralgia is frequent and septic arthritis of large joints occurs in some patients; whereas in spirillary RBF, joint manifestations are rare. - Mod.ML]

Diagnostics and laboratory testing
----------------------------------
RBF should be suspected in patients with fever, nausea, vomiting, joint pain, and rash, as well as a known or suspected history of rodent exposure.

_Streptobacillus moniliformis_
------------------------------
- RBF is diagnosed by conducting culture isolation of _S. moniliformis_ from blood, synovial fluid, other body fluids, affected tissues such as abscessed organs, or primary lesions. _S. moniliformis_ may be isolated in the synovial fluid of patients with septic arthritis, but will be sterile in most. The organism is difficult to grow in culture and requires specific media and incubation conditions.
- In the absence of a positive culture, Gram stain identification of pleomorphic gram-negative bacilli in appropriate specimens supports a preliminary diagnosis.
- Historically, serological assays were used for diagnostic purposes; however, validated serological tests for RBF determination in humans are currently not available.

_Spirillum minus_
--------------------
- _S. minus_ does not grow in artificial media. For this reason, diagnosis is made by identifying characteristic spirochetes in appropriate specimens using darkfield microscopy or differential stains.

Treatment
---------
If your provider suspects that you have RBF, he or she will treat you with antibiotics. Intravenous penicillin G given for 7 or more days, then oral penicillin, is usually recommended for the treatment of RBF. However, patients can develop Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions, which can complicate penicillin treatment. Patients usually improve quickly once antibiotics are started. Without appropriate treatment, the overall mortality rate is about 10 percent.

In patients allergic to penicillin, doxycycline or streptomycin are alternative choices.

[Patients with _S. moniliformis_ endocarditis or metastatic abscesses require more prolonged antibiotic therapy, e.g., endocardits is treated with high-dose penicillin G plus either streptomycin or gentamicin for 4-6 weeks (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1797630/). - Mod.ML]

RBF can present similarly to other febrile rash illnesses such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF). If RBF and RMSF are both in the differential diagnosis, doxycycline should be considered as 1st-line treatment given the need for rapid treatment and limited diagnostics for both diseases. This consideration applies to pediatric patients younger than 8 years old as dental staining is not a risk when using doxycycline for less than 14 days
(https://www.cdc.gov/rat-bite-fever/health-care-workers/index.html).
- Mod.UBA

HealthMap/ProMED map available at:
New Haven, Connecticut, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6172872,4624]
See Also
2017
----
Rat bite fever - Nepal: (KV) 1st report 20171204.5481858
Rat bite fever - France: quadraplegia 20170217.4846919
2015
----
Rat bite fever - USA: (PA) fatal 20150321.3244591
2014
----
Rat bite fever - USA (02): (CA) fatal, 2013 20141224.3053384
Rat bite fever - USA: (CA) fatal, 2013 20140226.2301634
2013
----
Rat bite fever - USA: (WA) 20130111.1492749
2012
----
Rat bite fever - USA: (WA), multiple cases, RFI 20121215.1453643
2005
----
Bacillary rat bite fever, fatal, 2003 - USA (FL,WA):MMWR report 20050108.0063
2001
----
Rat bite fever - USA (California) 20010915.2226
.................................................uba/mj/ml
</body>
