<header id=000562>
Published Date: 2013-03-17 15:13:25 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Rabies - USA (03): organ transplant
Archive Number: 20130317.1591000
</header>
<body id=000562>
RABIES - USA (03): ORGAN TRANSPLANT
***********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sun 17 Mar 2013
Source: Fox News, Associated Press report [edited]
http://www.foxnews.com/health/2013/03/17/hundreds-checked-for-rabies-after-transplant-death/


Public health agencies in 5 states are assessing the rabies risk for hundreds of people who may have had close contact with an infected organ donor and 4 transplant recipients, one of whom died, officials said on Saturday [16 Mar 2013].

About 200 medical workers, relatives, and others were assessed for potential exposure in Maryland, where the man who received an infected kidney died, state veterinarian Katherine Feldman said. She said fewer than 2 dozen were urged to get the rabies vaccine as a preventive measure.

In Florida, about 90 people were identified as potentially exposed, and 3 were offered the rabies vaccine as of Friday [15 Mar 2013], state health department spokeswoman Ashley Carr said.

Illinois Department of Public Health spokeswoman Melaney Arnold said the only potential exposures there were people who worked with the patient or the transplanted organ. She said only the organ recipient is receiving rabies treatment.

Health officials in Georgia and North Carolina are also involved in the epidemiological investigation prompted by the Maryland man's death from rabies in late February [2013], nearly 18 months after he got the kidney from a donor in Pensacola, Florida. However, officials in those states didn't respond to requests from The Associated Press about the number of people they're assessing.

Doctors in Florida didn't test the 20 year old donor for rabies before he died in September 2011. His heart, liver, and other kidney went to recipients in Florida, Georgia, and Illinois. They started getting the vaccine this month [March 2013], and none has had rabies symptoms. A rabies expert unconnected to the case, Dr Rodney Willoughby of Milwaukee, said they have a strong chance of surviving since they haven't shown any symptoms. Health officials say the virus can be spread through the infected person's saliva and mucous membranes, but human-to-human transmission is rare. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta says there has been only one documented instance of transmission by a bite in the US.

Feldman said Friday [15 Mar 2013] that the search for potential exposure subjects in Maryland was wrapping up. She said medical workers typically take precautions, and "we don't share saliva with that many people in our day-to-day goings about."

CDC spokeswoman Melissa Dankel said investigators are still trying to learn how the transplant donor got infected with the raccoon rabies virus that was found in his brain tissue and that of the Maryland man. She said the donor was an outdoorsman who might have been bitten by a wild animal in his native North Carolina before moving to Florida and beginning training as an Air Force aviation mechanic 17 weeks before his death. He visited a clinic at the Pensacola Naval Air Station in August 2011 for abdominal pain and vomiting and was transferred to a civilian hospital 4 days later, said Defense Department spokeswoman Cynthia Smith. He later developed encephalitis, a brain inflammation that can have a host of causes, including rabies, but he wasn't tested for the disease, CDC officials say. Smith said the airman died of severe gastroenteritis -- inflammation of the stomach and small intestine -- complicated by dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, and seizure. The Florida Department of Health said he died of encephalitis of unknown origin. Federal rules require organ banks to disclose any known or suspected infectious conditions that might be transmitted by donor organs. CDC officials say they don't know what information was communicated.

Federal guidelines published last year [2012] for evaluating organ donors with encephalitis urge "extreme caution" if the suspected cause is a viral pathogen, such as rabies. Dr Michael Green, a University of Pittsburgh professor who heads the committee that wrote the guidelines, said the guidelines hadn't been published when the Florida patient died. He also said rabies transmission through solid organ transplants is rare. There have been just 2 other documented instances worldwide, one in Germany and a 2004 US case in which all 4 recipients died. CDC says there have been 8 documented instances of rabies being transmitted by transplanted corneas. "Nonetheless, if asked whether or not I would use organs where concern for rabies was active in the potential donor, I would urge extreme caution before using organs from this person," Green said.

One of the patients who died in the 2004 case was 18 year old male patient of Gilmer, Texas after a kidney transplant. He had had kidney problems since he was a child. His mother said on Saturday [16 Mar 2013] that if rabies is suspected in a transplant donor, doctors should go ahead and transplant the organs, and then give recipients the rabies vaccine.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2]
Date: Fri 15 Mar 2013
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Division of News & Electronic Media, Office of Communication [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2013/s0315_rabies_organs.html


CDC and the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene have confirmed that a patient who recently died of rabies in Maryland contracted the infection through organ transplantation done more than a year ago. The patient was one of 4 people who had received an organ from the same donor. This week, CDC laboratories tested tissue samples from the donor and from the recipient who died to confirm transmission of rabies through organ transplantation.

In early March 2013, the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene initiated an investigation after the organ recipient died, which led to the rabies diagnosis. The investigation revealed that the organ recipient had no reported animal exposures, the usual source of rabies transmission to humans, and identified the possibility of transplant-related transmission of rabies, which is extremely rare.

The organ transplantation occurred more than a year before the recipient developed symptoms and died of rabies; this period is much longer than the typical rabies incubation period of 1-3 months but is consistent with prior case reports of long incubation periods. CDC's preliminary laboratory analysis indicates that the recipient and the donor both had the same type of rabies virus, a raccoon type. This type of rabies virus can infect not only raccoons but also other wild and domestic animals. In the United States, only one other person is reported to have died from a raccoon-type rabies virus.

In 2011, the donor became ill and was admitted to a healthcare facility in Florida and then died. At that time, the donor's organs, including the kidneys, heart, and liver, were recovered and sent to recipients in Florida, Georgia, Illinois, and Maryland. At the time of the donor's death, rabies was not suspected as the cause, and testing for rabies was not performed. Rabies was only recently confirmed as the cause of death after the current investigation began in Maryland.

Shortly before becoming ill, the donor had moved to Florida but was a previous resident of North Carolina, where it is believed the exposure may have occurred. How the donor may have gotten rabies is currently under investigation.

The 3 other people who received organs from the donor have been identified and are currently being evaluated by their healthcare teams and receiving anti-rabies shots (immune globulin and anti-rabies vaccination). CDC is working with public health officials and health care facilities in 5 states (Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, and North Carolina) to identify people who were in close contact with the initial donor or the 4 organ recipients and might need rabies post-exposure treatment.

All potential organ donors in the United States are screened and tested to identify whether the donor might present an infectious risk. Organ procurement organizations are responsible for evaluating the suitability of each organ donor. Donor eligibility is determined through a series of questions posed to family and close contacts, a physical examination, and infectious disease testing, including HIV and hepatitis. There are typically 1-3 cases of human rabies diagnosed annually in the United States each year. If rabies is not clinically suspected, laboratory testing for rabies is not routinely performed, as it is difficult for doctors to confirm results in the short window of time they have to keep the organs viable for the recipient. Organ screening is designed to ensure safe and successful transplantations. The benefits from transplanted organs generally outweigh the risk for transmission of infectious diseases from screened donors.

Rabies is a preventable viral disease of mammals most often transmitted through the bite of a rabid animal. The rabies virus infects the central nervous system, ultimately causing disease in the brain and death within days of the onset of illness. In the United States, bats, raccoons, skunks, and foxes are the most commonly reported rabid animals. However, bats remain the animal most frequently associated with transmitting rabies to humans.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[These reports clarify some of the circumstances associated with the death of the Maryland organ recipient. The deceased patient was one of 4 organ recipients from the same donor, a man who unknowingly had contracted a raccoon-variant rabies virus infection. The 3 surviving organ recipients are receiving rabies post-exposure prophylaxis and appear to be unaffected one year after receiving the organ donation. It is not revealed which organs were donated and to which patients. Further information is awaited. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1hiS, http://healthmap.org/r/1DmA.]
See Also
Rabies - USA (02): (MD) organ transplant 20130316.1589941
2010
---
Amebic meningoencephalitis, organ transplant - USA: (AZ) 20100924.3451
2009
---
Amebic meningoencephalitis, organ transplant - USA (02): (MS) 20091222.4309
Amebic meningoencephalitis, organ transplant - USA (MS) 20091220.4298
2006
---
Trypanosomiasis, organ transplant - USA 20060727.2073
2005
---
Rabies, human, organ transplantation - Germany (03) 20050220.0556
Rabies, human, organ transplantation - Germany 20050217.0530
2004
---
Rabies, human, organ transplantation - USA (02) 20040710.1851
Rabies, human, organ transplantation - USA 20040702.1766
.................................................cp/msp/sh
</body>
