<header id=059562>
Published Date: 2013-07-04 04:56:12 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Blastomycosis, pet - USA: (OH)
Archive Number: 20130704.1806236
</header>
<body id=059562>
BLASTOMYCOSIS, PET - USA: (OHIO)
********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 3 Jul 2013
Source: NBC4i [edited]
http://www.nbc4i.com/story/22745725/deadly-dog-fungus


Attention pet owners: there is a deadly disease lurking near your pet, and you've probably never heard of it.

Dogs are dying around the country because of something they can get in an instant.

"Your stomach just sinks when you realize that this is even a possibility," said a dog owner. A day at the beach in Chicago left the man's best friend, his dog, with an eye infection. But it quickly got worse. "Your dog is now blind," he said. The 6-year-old Golden Retriever contracted the fungal infection blastomycosis.

"Blastomycosis is a fungal spore, and present in most soils and typically in river valley areas. So, Ohio River valley, Mississippi, Tennessee," said Dr Evelyn Tannhof, of Health and Harmony Animal Hospital in Grandview. Tannhof said any dog can contract the infection, but it's more common in dogs that sniff and hunt. Younger male dogs are most at risk, and they contract it by sniffing, digging, and rooting around.

It's inhaled, gets into the blood stream and goes straight for the organs. So what should pet owners look for?

"Back to the lungs, so coughing, exercise intolerance, being lethargic," Tannhof said. Other clinical signs include limping, open wounds, and eye lesions. "So it can cause ocular lesions, redness, or inflammation of the eye, so you'd notice that," Tannhof said.

[The man] noticed the signs, but it was too late for his dog. "His blindness is permanent. The fungus attacked his eyes to the point that his retinas detached," he said.

"It can be deadly," Tannhof said.

Blastomycosis can also look like other diseases, so it might not be on your radar. "It's something that nobody wants to hear your dog has," the man said. Treatment of blastomycosis is long-term, usually involving antifungal oral medications.

Cats can contract it, too, but experts said dogs are far more likely. While it's not as common in Central Ohio, dogs can contract the infection anywhere, and it's especially important for those who take their dogs to a beach or riverbank to play.

[Byline: Denise Yost]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Ohio may be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/2uyX.

Blastomycosis, caused by the dimorphic fungus _Blastomyces dermatitidis_, is characterized by pyogranulomatous lesions in various tissues. It is most common in humans, dogs, and cats but has also been described in such widely divergent species as horses, ferrets, deer, wolves, African lions, bottlenosed dolphins, and sea lions. It appears not to be a disease of cattle, sheep, or pigs. Blastomycosis is generally limited to North America, and most cases have occurred in the Mississippi, Missouri, Tennessee, and Ohio River basins and along the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence Seaway. Even within these river basins, the organism is found in geographically restricted areas. Beaver dams and other habitats where soil is moist, acidic, and rich in decaying vegetation may serve as the ecologic niche for the organism, but it is often difficult to find in the environment. The organism has also been recovered from pigeon and bat feces. Rain, dew, or fog may play a critical role in liberating the infective conidia, which then are aerosolized and inhaled. When respiratory defenses are overwhelmed or immuno-suppressed, disseminated disease occurs via hematogenous spread from the lungs. Cutaneous lesions may result from a primary entry through the skin or, more commonly, by dissemination from a pulmonary focus. Needle-stick injuries to veterinary personnel following aspiration of cutaneous lesions from infected animals have resulted in primary cutaneous infection. Ocular lesions tend to develop first in the posterior segment, resulting in granulomatous chorioretinitis and retinal detachment. Anterior segment involvement often follows, resulting in anterior uveitis and panophthalmitis.

The signs vary with organ involvement and are not specific. Weight loss may be accompanied by coughing, anorexia, lymphadenopathy, dyspnea, ocular disease, lameness, skin lesions, and fever. Dry, harsh lung sounds from lung lesions are extremely common in dogs with blastomycosis. Signs of pulmonary involvement are seen in up to 85 percent of affected dogs. Severe pulmonary involvement results in hypoxemia, which indicates a poor prognosis. Lymph node involvement is seen in about half of affected dogs, which is about the same proportion of dogs that have cutaneous involvement. Skin lesions may include proliferative granulomas and subcutaneous abscesses that ulcerate and drain a serosanguineous discharge. The skin lesions are often very small and multifocal in dogs, but large abscesses are occasionally seen, especially in cats. The planum nasale, face, and nail beds are most often involved. Signs of ocular blastomycosis are seen in 30-50 percent of affected dogs and include blindness, uveitis, glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Lameness associated with fungal osteomyelitis or severe paronychia occurs in about one quarter of affected dogs. CNS signs are uncommon, occurring in less than 5 percent of dogs, but they may be more common in cats. The pattern of systemic involvement is similar in cats, but cats are affected far less commonly than dogs. Hematuria, nocturia, and dysuria with tenesmus may be seen with urogenital blastomycosis.

Blastomycosis should be considered in dogs with draining cutaneous nodules and signs of respiratory disease. In cats, respiratory tract involvement is seen most frequently, followed by involvement of the CNS, regional lymph nodes, skin, eyes, and GI and urinary tracts. Radiographic findings in the lungs include noncalcified nodules or consolidation, and enlargement of the bronchial and mediastinal lymph nodes. The predominant patterns on thoracic radiographs are those of diffuse nodular interstitial and peribronchial densities. Commonly, the bronchial lymph nodes are greatly enlarged and appear in radiographs as dense masses. Diagnosis can be made from biopsy tissue or aspirated specimens taken from cutaneous lesions or other involved organs by the presence of thick-walled yeast that often have daughter cells budding from a broad base. These round to ovoid, pale pink (H&E stain) blastospores measure 8-25 microns and have a refractile, double-contoured wall. They may be empty or contain basophilic nuclear material and have single broad-based buds. An antibody response, detected by agar gel immuno-diffusion, usually occurs, but this response is neither sensitive nor specific when attempting to make a definitive diagnosis.

Itraconazole (5 mg/kg/day) is the treatment of choice for dogs and cats with blastomycosis. A minimum of 2 months of treatment is necessary, and the drug should be continued until active disease is not apparent. Clinical cure can be expected in about 70 percent of dogs, with recurrence in about 20 percent of treated dogs months to years after treatment. Most dogs will respond to retreatment with itraconazole. Other azoles such as fluconazole and ketoconazole are not as effective as itraconazole. In fulminating cases of blastomycosis, especially those with evidence of hypoxemia, combination therapy with amphotericin B and itraconazole is recommended. Short courses of anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids have been advocated during the 1st few days of treatment by some, but steroid use is controversial and may actually worsen the prognosis. The prognosis is best for dogs without lung disease or with only mild lung disease, is more guarded for dogs with moderate to severe lung disease, and is poorest for dogs with CNS involvement.

Portions of this comment have been have been extracted from http://www.merckmanuals.com/vet/generalized_conditions/fungal_infections/blastomycosis.html?qt=blastomycosis&alt=sh

It is interesting to note the occurrences of this fungus, as seen below in the "see also" section of the ProMED-mail archives. It is likely the emergence of this fungus and clusters of cases is related to appropriate weather conditions in certain locales. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Blastomycosis fungus, canine - USA (MI) 20110729.2286
2010
----
Blastomycosis - USA: (WI) cluster 20100913.3302
2002
----
Blastomycosis - Canada (Ontario) (02) 20021215.6066
Blastomycosis - Canada (Ontario) 20021211.6041
Blastomycosis - USA (N. Carolina): alert 20020330.3845
1999
----
Blastomycosis - USA (Minnesota) (03) 19990923.1698
Blastomycosis - USA (Minnesota) (02) 19990910.1598
Blastomycosis - USA (Minnesota) 19990909.1591
Blastomycosis, occupational - USA (Colorado) 19990224.0250
1998
----
Blastocystis hominis - USA ex India (02) 19981219.2408
Blastocystis hominis - USA ex India: RFI 19981212.2363
1997
----
Chromoblastomycosis - Madagascar 19970227.0457
Chromoblastomycosis workshop - Madagascar, 28 Feb.1997 19970226.0445
1996
----
Blastomycosis - Illinois, USA (3) 19960702.1204
Blastomycosis - Illinois, USA (2) 19960628.1187
Blastomycosis - Illinois, USA: RFI 19960627.1182
.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
