<header id=052779>
Published Date: 2018-10-23 16:26:43 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Pythiosis - USA: equine, Chincoteague ponies
Archive Number: 20181023.6108048
</header>
<body id=052779>
PYTHIOSIS - USA: EQUINE, CHINCOTEAGUE PONIES
********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 19 Oct 2018
Source: Delmarva Now [edited]
https://eu.delmarvanow.com/story/news/local/virginia/2018/10/19/chincoteague-ponies-swamp-cancer/1681611002/


The annual Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company pony auction took place at the carnival grounds on Thu 12 Jul 2018, where the ponies are sold to help fund the fire company and care for the ponies throughout the year.

The feral Chincoteague ponies may be different than a typical domestic horse, but they're currently facing a very traditional horse issue: "Swamp cancer," an often-deadly disease that leaves the ponies with lesions on their bodies.

Seven ponies have been afflicted, said Denise Bowden, spokesperson for the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company, which manages the ponies. She estimated initial treatments for the disease will cost about USD 1500 per pony.

Swamp cancer is not a true cancer, but rather a disease caused by the oomycete _Pythium_, which is similar to a fungus. Its medical name is "pythiosis," and the disease also has the ability to affect human beings, dogs and other large animals, although not as frequently, experts say.

Those people caring for the ponies have known about the disease for a while, but it came to the forefront of people's attention following the fall pony roundup Fri 12 Oct 2018 and Sat 13 Oct 2018.

Bowden said 2 ponies died from swamp cancer last year [2017]. This year, however, the ponies are expected to be just fine for the most part. The ponies have not been responsive to an antibiotic, but they are undergoing a new treatment that has a success rate as high as 80 percent.

For a long time, the disease was considered expensive and almost entirely un-curable. In many veterinary schools, it is still taught that way, said Bob Glass, owner of Pan American Veterinary Labs in Lexington, Texas, about 50 miles from Austin.

"It used to be considered a curse because there weren't any treatments that really worked," Glass said. "It used to be that owners would spend between USD 5000-10 000, and the horse would still die."

Glass has treated swamp cancer in horses before and is likely one of the people who can best be considered an expert on the disease, but he says even he doesn't know that much about it.

What is known is that the infectious agent _Pythium insidiosum_ typically lives in plants that grow near water. When the plants are wet or are submerged in water for whatever reason, it releases zoospores, which are effectively spores that can swim, into the water.

Those zoospores can spread infection by getting into holes on an animal's body as small as a mosquito bite or a scrape. Glass said the disease has a low infection rate, but it can be very difficult to get rid of once it gets into a creature's body.

Swamp cancer creates an autoimmune response in horses similar to an allergic reaction, but the reaction doesn't kill off the pythium in the body. Glass, working with other experts, helped to develop an immunotherapy treatment similar to a vaccine to help a horse's body instead respond in a way that gets rid of the disease.

Bowden said those caring for the ponies were exploring a different treatment, one involving surgery. It should begin soon and last for at least a few months.

"When humans and household pets come in contract with it through a small cut or scrape, it's easy to treat because it's detected early enough," Bowden said in an email. "Our wild ponies go for days without anyone seeing them, so when the issue has been spotted and we bring in the pony, the fungus is running amuck."

People at the volunteer fire company are working with experts around the country, including veterinarians from Texas and biologists from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bowden said. They are hoping they will be able to test areas in which the ponies roam to figure out more about the disease's origins in the Chincoteague ponies, although Bowden said it has been making its way up the coast for a while.

There are 2 key reasons the disease has grown in prominence in recent years, Glass said. The 1st is that 20 years ago, people didn't know what swamp cancer truly was, what caused it or how to treat it. The 2nd, and perhaps the more causal one, is that recent weather patterns in Delmarva have made it more likely for plants with Pythium to grow and release spores.

"Pythium likes warm and wet areas, areas with a lot of flooding," Glass said. "When you have a hot summer that shrinks bodies of water, the plants will grow toward the water. When that water fills back in, the disease spreads."

Swamp cancer has been found in many parts of the southeastern United States as a result, Glass said.

Many fans of the Chincoteague ponies have expressed great concern for the animals on the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company's Facebook page, thanking those who care for the ponies and offering to raise money if necessary.

For now, Bowden emphasizes the ponies just need time and care.

"It's going to take a lot of love and care (we have plenty of that!) to administer this medicine and procedures," a post written by Bowden on the fire company's Facebook page reads. "WE ARE CONFIDENT that we are going in the right direction. Will keep you posted!!"

[Byline: Hayley Harding, < hharding@delmarvanow.com>

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[To understand why the Chincoteague ponies have a special name and garner so much attention, I have included some history for those unfamiliar with the situation. Then the distressing condition will be addressed and then back to some interesting history:

The Chincoteague Pony became an official registered breed in 1994. The average height of a Chincoteague Pony is between 12 and 13 hands (any horse that stands less than 14 hands is considered a Pony). Chincoteague Ponies are stocky, with short legs, thick manes, and large, round bellies.

Assateague Island is a harsh environment for the ponies and their diet is limited. The ponies have adapted to the limited diet over the hundreds of years they have lived on Assateague (the barrier island for Virginia and Maryland). The ponies primarily eat the salt water cord grass that grows in the marshes on Assateague Island. They eat almost all day just to get enough nutrition from this diet to sustain themselves. The salt content of the cord grass is very high. To compensate for all the salt in the cord grass, they drink twice as much water as a normal horse. This is why their bellies appear so bloated.

These historical ponies with ties into the modern world are affected by a rather nasty organism. Pythiosis caused by the organism _Pythium insidiosum_, is a distressing and troublesome condition. It does appear as a growth with looks painful and nasty (photos may be seen at:
https://www.horsetalk.co.nz/2015/07/17/effective-treatment-strategy-swamp-cancer-described/).

While a number of treatments have been tried and had limited success, there appears to be treatment out of Texas. It may be a type of vaccine, according to the website:
https://www.victoriaadvocate.com/news/local/pythiosis-in-horses---swamp-cancer/article_b564b962-a65c-11e8-934c-4b882cdd7a43.html. A vaccination is now available and is given in a series of 3 injections on Day 1, Day 7 and Day 21. Studies show good results with the vaccine alone. Anti-fungal medications have been used in the past for treatment; however, there has been varied success. Early detection is key, since the smaller the lesion the easier it is to remove it. This is also the case for treatment with the vaccine. If the vaccine is started within the 1st 14 days, the success of treatment is significantly higher.

The other treatment (other than vaccine) appears to be a combination of excision of excessive tissue caused by the causative agent and a combination of drugs. Healing of pythiosis lesions treated according to this particular regiment may be viewed at https://www.horsetalk.co.nz/2015/07/17/effective-treatment-strategy-swamp-cancer-described/. Each horse was given a single intravenous dose with amphotericin B and dimethylsulfoxide in the affected tissue after the excess tissue was surgically removed (as stated according to the above referenced website).

Precisely which of these protocols is being followed is slightly unclear. However, what is important is that the protocol in use on the Chincoteague ponies, according to the news articles, appears to be working successfully.

So below is a bit more history regarding these ponies:

Two herds of wild horses make their home on Assateague Island (barrier islands) off the coast of Maryland and Virginia, separated by a fence at the Maryland-Virginia line. These small but sturdy, shaggy horses have adapted to their environment over the years by eating dune and marsh grasses and drinking fresh water from ponds. While they appear tame, they are wild, and Park Rangers urge visitors not to feed or pet them. The Maryland herd is managed by the National Park Service. The Virginia herd is owned by the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company. Each year the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company purchases a grazing permit from the National Fish & Wildlife Service. This permit allows the Fire Company to maintain a herd of approximately 150 adult ponies on Assateague Island. The Fire Company controls the herd size with a pony auction on the last Thursday in July. Each year tens of thousands of spectators come to watch the Saltwater Cowboys swim the pony herd from Assateague Island to Chincoteague Island.

Wild ponies have inhabited Assateague Island for hundreds of years. Some have suggested the wild ponies of Assateague trace their origin to horses released to forage on the Island by early settlers. However, the evidence strongly suggests they are the descendants of the survivors of a Spanish galleon which wrecked off the coast of Assateague. This story, which has been passed from generation to generation on Chincoteague Island, is stronger than fiction.

If you've ever seen a shipwreck map of the mid Atlantic coastline, then you know that there were a remarkable number of shipwrecks. Before modern navigation, ships used lighthouses and the stars to navigate at night. This worked well until a bad storm came up or heavy fog set in, which impaired visibility. This caused ships to get off course and hit sandbars along the coast. This would usually occur during a storm and the large waves would beat the wooden ship apart. The large number of shipwrecks, together with the fact that it was very common for ships to be transporting ponies to the Colonies or South America, makes it very likely that ponies originally got to Assateague from a shipwreck.

Penning began as a way for livestock owners to claim, brand, break and harness their loose herds. By the 1700's it had become an annual event, complete with drinking, eating and plenty of revelry by the entire community. The earliest known description of Pony Penning was published in 1835. The practice was then already an "ancient" custom held in June on Assateague Island. Penning on Chincoteague Island is not mentioned until the mid-1800's, and it believed to have been begun by 2 islanders who owned large herds that grazed on Chincoteague.

After a string of disastrous fires in the Town of Chincoteague, the villagers realized their fire-fighting equipment was seriously inadequate. In 1925 the town authorized the Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company to hold a carnival during Pony Penning to raise funds. That year over 15 colts were sold to benefit the fire company, and the carnival was a huge success. Bolstered by the interest in the pony swim, visitors began arriving from across the country for the annual penning. The crowd in 1937 was estimated at 25 000. The increased revenue from the carnivals and auctions enabled the fire company to modernize its equipment and facilities, and in 1947 it began to build its own herd by purchasing ponies from local owners. They moved the herd to Assateague where the government allowed publicly owned, not private, herds to graze on the newly established Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge.

That same year, 1947, Marguerite Henry published Misty of Chincoteague, the story that made Pony Penning internationally famous. A movie followed, as did several sequel books. The tale of the wild pony Phantom, her foal Misty and the children who buy and raise her has become a classic, still loved and enjoyed by each new generation.

Pony Penning is still held in July during the Chincoteague Volunteer Firemen's Carnival. "Salt Water Cowboys" herd the horses across the narrowest part of Assateague Channel at low tide, after which they are examined by veterinarians. After a resting period, they are herded through town to a corral at the Carnival Grounds where they stay until the next day's auction. The Pony Auction not only provides a source of revenue for the fire company, but it also serves to trim the herd's numbers. To retain the permit to graze on the refuge, the herd must not exceed 150 horses.

Each year thousands of people flock to Chincoteague Island to watch the Pony Penning and enjoy the Firemen's Carnival. For many of them, the trek to the shores of Assateague Channel on the last Wednesday and Thursday of July has become an annual event, an opportunity to participate in a tradition older than the country itself. For more information about the annual Pony Swim.

History of the Ponies has been extracted from "The Ponies" on the website
http://www.chincoteague.com/ponies.html. - Mod.TG]
See Also
2017
--
Pythiosis - USA (OK): canine 20170426.4997435
2015
--
Intestinal parasites, canine - USA (02): (SC) increase, comment, pythiosis 20151026.3744172
Pythiosis - USA (02): (FL) canine 20150818.3585235
Pythiosis - USA (FL): equine 20150816.3581351
2012
--
Pythiosis, human - USA: (TX) 20120418.1104908
2011
--
Pythiosis, equine - USA (02) 20110429.1327
Pythiosis, equine - USA 20110424.1283
.................................................sb/tg/msp/lm
</body>
