<header id=057804>
Published Date: 2013-06-02 01:10:15 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hepatitis non-A/B/C/D/E: parvovirus-like hybrid
Archive Number: 20130602.1750302
</header>
<body id=057804>
HEPATITIS NON-A/B/C/D/E: PARVOVIRUS-LIKE HYBRID
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 28 May 2013
Source: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA (PNAS) [edited]
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2013/05/24/1303744110.full.pdf


[ref: Xu B, Zhi N, Hu G, et al: Hybrid DNA virus in Chinese patients with seronegative A-E hepatitis discovered by deep sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; Epub ahead of print]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract
--------
Seronegative hepatitis -- non-A, non-B, non-C, non-D, non-E hepatitis -- is poorly characterized but strongly associated with serious complications. We collected 92 sera specimens from patients with non-A-E hepatitis in Chongqing, China between 1999 and 2007. 10 sera pools were screened by Solexa deep sequencing. We discovered a 3780-bp contig present in all 10 pools that yielded BLASTx E [basic local alignment search tool] scores of 7e-05-0.008 against parvoviruses. The complete sequence of the in silico-assembled 3780-bp contig was confirmed by gene amplification of overlapping regions over almost the entire genome, and the virus was provisionally designated NIH-CQV. Further analysis revealed that the contig was composed of 2 major ORFs [open reading frames]. By protein BLAST, ORF1 and ORF2 were most homologous to the replication-associated protein of bat circovirus and the capsid protein of porcine parvovirus, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that NIH-CQV is located at the interface of _Parvoviridae_ and _Circoviridae_. Prevalence of NIH-CQV in patients was determined by quantitative PCR. 63 of 90 patient samples (70 per cent) were positive, but all those from 45 healthy controls were negative. Average virus titer in the patient specimens was 1.05 e4 copies/microL. Specific antibodies against NIH-CQV were sought by immunoblotting. 84 per cent of patients were positive for IgG, and 31 per cent were positive for IgM; in contrast, 78 per cent of healthy controls were positive for IgG, but all were negative for IgM. Although more work is needed to determine the etiologic role of NIH-CQV in human disease, our data indicate that a parvovirus-like virus is highly prevalent in a cohort of patients with non-A-E hepatitis.

Most viral hepatitis are secondary to infection by known hepatotropic viruses: hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis delta virus (HDV), and hepatitis E virus (HEV). Other hepatitis-associated viruses, including CMV [cytomegalovirus], Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, human herpesvirus 6, human parvovirus B19V (B19V), and adenoviruses, may cause liver injury, ranging from mild and transient elevation of aminotransferases to acute hepatitis and occasionally acute liver failure. Despite the number of hepatitis viruses and hepatitis-associated viruses, etiology cannot be determined in 10-20 per cent of the cases of acute hepatitis, in 30 per cent of cases of cryptogenic chronic liver diseases, in hepatitis-associated aplastic anemia, and in a large proportion of cases of acute liver failure. Patients with acute seronegative hepatitis have fewer parenteral risk factors, more severe bilirubin and transaminase elevations, and worse hepatocellular synthetic function than patients with hepatitis C. Moreover, seronegative hepatitis is more strongly associated with serious complications, especially bone marrow failure and childhood fulminant hepatitis.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has had an increasing impact on biological research and clinical diagnosis, because it provides high-resolution genome-scale data rapidly and reliably. The 1st application of NGS for pathogen discovery in a patient who died of a febrile illness after solid-organ transplantation led to the identification of an arenavirus. NGS based platforms, such as 454 and Solexa deep sequencing, have been applied successfully to the investigation of emerging human pathogens, resulting in major discoveries of new human viruses.

In the present study, we established an experimental and analytic procedure for identifying virus identification in human specimens based on Solexa deep sequencing. We applied the method to screen for potential viral infection in human sera specimens and discovered a human virus in Chinese patients who had seronegative hepatitis. From its genome organization and phylogeny, the virus is unusual, because it is evolutionarily at the interface of the parvovirus and circovirus families, perhaps having emerged from interfamilial recombination. The virus was highly prevalent in a patient population, and active infection in seronegative hepatitis cases was suggested by the presence of viral DNA in the blood and serology. However, more work is needed to establish a firm disease association.

[Interested readers should access the original text at the source URL above to view the data, figures, and references. Only the Discussion is reproduced here.- Mod.CP]

Discussion
----------
We report the identification of a virus, NIH-CQV, in patients with non-A-E hepatitis. Phylogenetically NIH-CQV appears to lie at the interface of parvoviruses and circoviruses. The genome of NIH-CQV has no homology to any known viruses in GenBank.

Although comparative analysis revealed that the Rep and CP proteins of NIH-CQV have limited homologies with circoviruses and parvoviruses, respectively, the overall genome organization of NIH-CQV has the basic characteristics of viruses in _Parvoviridae_.

NIH-CQV has a small, compact linear DNA genome with 2 tandemly arranged major ORFs encoding Rep and CP proteins, respectively, and a pair of ITRs [inverted terminal repeats] at the left and right ends of the genome. In silico promoter prediction suggested that transcription of the rep and cp was regulated by a single promoter upstream of the rep, because there was no apparent promoter sequence immediately upstream of cp. A pre-mRNA encoded by a single promoter that is processed by alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation to generate multiple mRNAs had been reported for other parvoviruses, such as B19V and Aleutian mink disease virus. By amino acid sequence analysis, CP protein of NIH-CQV is minimally homologous to porcine and goose parvovirus VP1. The homologous region is mainly in the N terminus of CP and contains the conserved PLA2-like motif, which is present in the N-terminal extension of the VP1 unique region of members of _Parvoviridae_. The phylogenetic tree constructed using amino acid sequences of CP of NIH-CQV and VP1 of other representative viruses in _Parvoviridae_ showed that NIH-CQV represents a deeply rooted lineage between 2 groups: (i) human and animal parvoviruses and (ii) insect parvoviruses. Thus, NIH-CQV appears to be a parvovirus-like virus.

However, NIH-CQV also has features shared by members of the _Circoviridae_ family. First, a BLASTp search revealed that the Rep of NIH-CQV is more related to circoviral Rep than to those of other viruses. Second, NIH-CQV appears to have an ambisense genome because there are bidirectional putative promoters in the intergenic region between the rep and 15-kDa protein and because rep and 15-kDa protein arranged head-to-head flank the intergenic region, which is a feature of circoviruses. Finally, sequencing and alignment of the inverse PCR products indicated the existence of the circular genome of NIH-CQV in the clinical samples. The circular form of NIH-CQV genome might represent a subviral DNA or an intermediate structure of viral replication, as reported for other parvoviruses.

Therefore, NIH-CQV appears to be a "hybrid" virus, perhaps formed by interfamilial recombination between a parvovirus and a circovirus. This idea was supported further by whole-proteome phylogenetic analysis, which showed NIH-CQV located between _Parvoviridae_ and _Circoviridae_.

Both recombination and a high mutation rate are often cited as key in evolutionary innovation. For many viruses, recombination allows single-step acquisition of multiple genetic changes, and a high mutation rate enhances adaptation to new hosts. These processes are critical driving forces in viral evolution and lead to viral emergence, host-switching, and adaptation, which often result in disease outbreaks. Recent studies had demonstrated that small eukaryotic ssDNA [single stranded DNA] viruses have high rates of nucleotide substitutions and genetic recombination, which may surpass rates seen in RNA viruses. These observations may explain the extensive diversity seen in ssDNA viruses. Parvoviruses (family _Parvoviridae_) and circoviruses (family _Circoviridae_) are both ssDNA viruses that infect a wide variety of animal species, including mammals, birds, and insects. Although horizontal gene transfer and high mutation rates have been documented in these viruses, cross-species viral transfers resulting from interfamilial recombination and leading to a infection in the new host species are not common.

A high rate of viral evolution has been reported for emerging parvoviruses. Canine parvovirus (CPV) is one well-characterized example. CPV emerged from feline panleukopenia parvovirus or a closely related virus, differing at several amino acid residues. Sequences of the viruses collected at time points before and after host-switching suggest that the emergence of CPV was dependent on a high mutation rate and positive selection of the major capsid gene. Our deep-sequencing data showed that NIH-CQV has a high substitution mutation rate throughout its genome. However, the impact of selective pressures, as measured by the Ka/Ks ratio, appeared to vary depending on location. The cp gene contained three regions in which the Ka/Ks ratio exceeded 1, suggesting positive selection. These substitutions would be presumed to enhance fitness. In contrast, selective pressure on the rep of NIH-CQV appeared to be dominated by purifying selection, because the average Ka/Ks ratio for the rep from 14 patients was only 0.42. The Ka/Ks ratios for the regions encoding the PLA2 motif in the CP protein or P-loop nucleoside triphosphatase (NTPase) in the Rep proteins were lower than in other regions, as is consistent with strong purifying selection and functional importance of this region in viral replication.

NIH-CQV exhibited remarkable genetic heterogeneity within patients, indicating the presence of closely related variants or quasispecies in NIH-CQV-infected individuals. The Ka/Ks ratios of both viral cp and rep were greater in patients classified as having chronic hepatitis than in those with acute hepatitis, suggesting greater variation or more diversity of quasispecies of NIH-CQV over time. For hepatitis viruses C and E, diversification of quasispecies during infection is driven by the interaction between the viruses and host immune response and may be associated with different clinical outcomes. With a limited number of serial samples from a single individual, we were unable to conclude whether quasispecies dynamics of NIH-CQV in patients correlated with disease.

Despite technological advances in molecular biology, an etiology cannot be determined in as many as 20 per cent of hepatitis cases. As of yet, no causative agent may be defined in a significant proportion of patients with chronic liver disease and cirrhosis, whose disease therefore is characterized as "cryptogenic". Additional hepatitis agents have been suspected. Over several decades, several human viruses, such as GB virus C, Torque teno virus, and SEN virus, have been putatively claimed to be hepatitis viruses, but subsequent investigation revealed no conclusive association between these viruses and liver disease. Therefore, the etiology of non-A-E hepatitis remains unresolved. In this study, we applied NGS methodology to virus discovery and identified a parvovirus-like virus in the sera samples collected from a cohort of patients with non-A-E hepatitis. Our results showed that 28 per cent of patients were positive for both NIH-CQV-specific IgM and viral DNA, suggesting recent infection in patients. Most patients and healthy controls were positive for virus-specific IgG, suggesting that exposure was common in the population studied. The patients who yielded positive specimens suffered from symptoms of hepatitis with a wide range of liver dysfunction, including acute and chronic hepatitis. There was no difference between patients diagnosed with acute versus or chronic hepatitis with respect to detection of NIH-CQV DNA, but viral DNA was not detected in healthy controls.

Although these findings are suggestive of an etiologic relationship, our study has limitations. By electron microscopy, we observed virus-like particles in NIH-CQV qPCR [quantitative PCR]-positive sera which cosedimented with viral DNA, but we were unable to confirm their identity by immunogold labeling with our antisera. In addition, because of the limited availability of samples, we had insufficient material for viral propagation and isolation in cell culture, and efforts are in progress to detect viral proteins in a few liver biopsy tissue blocks. Additionally, with the limited number of samples available, we cannot exclude the possibility of reactivation of a latent virus in the course of liver inflammation.

In general, parvoviruses cause systemic infection, but clinical manifestations of the infection are varied and may depend on specific tissue tropisms as well as on host immunologic competency. For 2 human pathogenic parvoviruses, B19V and HBoV, clinical symptoms range from none to acute systemic manifestations involving skin and joints to subtle persistence of infection; in immunocompromised populations, B19V chronic infection causes pure red cell aplasia. In addition, coinfection of parvoviruses with other viruses, especially related DNA viruses, can lead to synergy and more severe clinical symptoms in the affected host. Because of the complexity of disease associations, more comprehensive epidemiology and in vitro studies are needed to establish a pathogenic role of NIH-CQV in hepatitis.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[The authors report the identification of a virus, designated NIH-CQV, in patients with non-A/B/C/D/E hepatitis. Phylogenetically this virus appears to lie at the interface of parvoviruses and circoviruses. The genome of NIH-CQV has no homology to any known hepatitis viruses. NIH-CQV has a small, compact linear DNA genome with 2 tandemly arranged major ORFs encoding Rep and CP proteins, respectively, and a pair of ITRs at the left and right ends of the genome. NIH-CQV represents a deeply rooted lineage between 2 groups: the human and animal parvoviruses and the insect parvoviruses. Thus, NIH-CQV appears to be a parvovirus-like virus.

However, NIH-CQV also has features shared by members of the _Circoviridae_ family. NIH-CQV exhibits ambisense encoding of sequences a feature shared with members of the _Circoviridae_ family. Therefore, NIH-CQV appears to be a "hybrid" virus, perhaps formed by interfamilial recombination between a parvovirus and a circovirus. This idea is supported further by whole-proteome phylogenetic analysis, which showed NIH-CQV located between the families _Parvoviridae_ and _Circoviridae_. Parvoviruses (family _Parvoviridae_) and circoviruses (family _Circoviridae_) are both ssDNA viruses that infect a wide variety of animal species, including mammals, birds, and insects. However, although horizontal gene transfer and high mutation rates have been documented in these viruses, cross-species viral transfers resulting from interfamilial recombination and leading to a infection in the new host species are not common.

Furthermore NIH-CQV exhibited remarkable genetic heterogeneity within patients, indicating the presence of closely related variants or quasispecies in NIH-CQV-infected individuals. For hepatitis viruses C and E, diversification of quasispecies during infection is driven by the interaction between the viruses and host immune response and may be associated with different clinical outcomes. With a limited number of serial samples from a single individual, the authors were unable to conclude whether quasispecies dynamics of NIH-CQV in patients correlated with disease.

The authors are aware that over the years several human viruses, such as GB virus C, Torque teno virus, and SEN virus, have been claimed to be hepatitis viruses, but subsequent investigation revealed no conclusive association between these viruses and liver disease. Therefore, the etiology of non-A/B/C/D/E hepatitis remains unsolved. In this study, the authors applied NGS methodology to virus discovery and identified a parvovirus-like virus in sera samples collected from a cohort of patients with non-A-E hepatitis. Nonetheless, the authors recognise that because of the complexity of disease associations, more comprehensive epidemiology and in vitro studies will be required to confirm NIH-CQV virus as a 6th hepatitis virus. - Mod.CP]

.................................................cp/mj/sh
</body>
