<header id=022474>
Published Date: 2012-10-23 07:16:56 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (08)
Archive Number: 20121023.1358143
</header>
<body id=022474>
FUNGAL INFECTION, CONTAMINATED DRUG - USA (08)
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Current CDC statistics
[2] NEJM commentary
[3] News report

******
[1] Current CDC statistics
Date: Mon 22 Oct 2012
Source: CDC [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/outbreaks/meningitis.html


At-a-glance
-----------
Status: ongoing investigation
Infection: fungal
Facility type: outpatient setting
Case count: 297
States: 16
Deaths: 23

State / Case Count / Deaths
Florida / 17 / 3
Idaho / 1 / 0
Illinois / 1 / 0
Indiana / 40 / 2
Maryland / 17 / 1
Michigan / 62 / 5
Minnesota / 7 / 0
New Hampshire / 10 / 0
New Jersey / 16 / 0
New York / 1 / 0
North Carolina / 2 / 1
Ohio / 11 / 0
Pennsylvania / 1 / 0
Tennessee / 69 / 9
Texas / 1 / 0
Virginia / 41 / 2
------------------
TOTALS = 297* cases with 23 deaths

*294 cases of fungal meningitis, stroke due to presumed fungal meningitis, or other central nervous system-related infection meeting the outbreak case definition, plus 3 peripheral joint infections (for example, knee, hip, shoulder, elbow). No deaths have been associated with peripheral joint infections.

Case counts by state are based on the state where the procedure was performed, not the state of residence.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] NEJM Commentary
Date: Fri 19 Oct 2012
Source: New England Journal of Medicine [edited]
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra1212617?query=featured_home


[Kauffman CA, Pappas PG, Patterson TF: Fungal infections associated with contaminated methylprednisolone injections -- preliminary report. N Engl J Med. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra1212617]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
We are in the midst of an unprecedented outbreak of fungal infections associated with epidural injection of methylprednisolone that was contaminated with environmental molds. The index case, which prompted clinicians at Vanderbilt to call the Tennessee Department of Health and which brought this event to national attention, is now reported by Pettit et al. in the Journal (1).

The persistence and progression of neutrophilic meningitis of unknown cause was the trigger for obtaining the history of a recent epidural injection of methylprednisolone. Then events fell into place. After the alarm was sounded about this association, other physicians throughout the country realized that they too had struggled to find a cause for similar cases in recent weeks. What is intriguing about this case report is that the mold causing meningitis was reported to be _Aspergillus fumigatus_, an organism that has not been detected in any of the subsequent 200-plus cases. The major culprit appears to be _Exserohilum rostratum_, a plant pathogen that rarely causes human disease. This mold has been cultured or identified by means of a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay from cerebrospinal fluid in at least 25 patients and has been detected in at least 1 unopened vial from the implicated lot of methylprednisolone.

Shortly after the Tennessee Department of Health was notified on 18 Sep 2012, the implicated lots were quickly identified, all centers that had received the implicated lots were alerted, and patients who had received injections (either epidural or intraarticular) from these lots were notified of the potential for fungal infection. It is estimated that over 14 000 patients received injections from these implicated lots. The compounding pharmacy producing the drug was closed, and all products (not just the implicated lots) were recalled. The CDC provided timely information regarding appropriate diagnostic testing and treatment, and the agency is providing daily updates on its website (http://www.cdc.gov). As the outbreak has evolved, numerous questions have been raised by physicians, patients who received injections from the implicated lots, and the public. We attempt to answer some of those questions here.

What do we know about the identified mold?
------------------------------------------
_E. rostratum_ is a dematiaceous, or black, mold containing melanin in its cell wall. It is widely found in the environment, on plant debris, in soil, and in water (2,3). Human infection is uncommon and is usually restricted to allergic sinusitis, keratitis, and localized soft-tissue infection. In rare cases, invasive infection occurs in immunocompromised patients.

The conidia [asexual spores] of this organism have distinctive morphologic features that allow its identification. The organism grows readily on the usual fungal culture mediums, but sporulation to identify the conidia typically requires the use of a plant-based medium, such as potato dextrose agar. Even though the mold grows readily in the laboratory, cultures from cerebrospinal fluid may be negative, as has been true for other mold infections of the central nervous system (CNS). Molecular identification can be used to establish a diagnosis, and PCR assays on cerebrospinal fluid have been useful in the current outbreak. It is important to note that the performance characteristics of this specific PCR assay have not been well characterized.

In tissues, _E. rostratum_, like many other dematiaceous fungi, appears as irregular, beaded hyphae, as compared with the broad, rarely septate, ribbonlike hyphae seen in the order _Mucorales_ and with the narrow, septate, acutely branching hyaline hyphae of _Aspergillus_ species. Special stains for cell-wall melanin (such as, Masson-Fontana stain) are useful to confirm the presence of a dark-walled mold.

Several outbreaks in the past decade have been associated with contamination with black molds. _Exophiala_ species were associated with a disturbingly similar outbreak of infections including meningitis that were traced back to a contaminated lot of glucocorticoid injections from a U.S. compounding pharmacy (4) and _Exophiala jeanselmei_ was identified in an outbreak associated with contaminated water (5,6).

What is the susceptibility to antifungal agents?
------------------------------------------------
Generally, exserohilum species are susceptible to available antifungal agents, but for some strains, the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the usually recommended agents, including voriconazole, is increased. Thus, susceptibility testing is advised, although there are no clinical data that strongly support that recommendation. Recent series indicate susceptibility to voriconazole for the majority of isolates, with the MIC ranging from 0.06 to 4 microg per milliliter; the MIC for amphotericin B ranges from 0.03 to 1 microg per milliliter (2). The MIC is 0.015 to 8 microg per milliliter for posaconazole, 0.015 to 16 microg per milliliter for itraconazole, and 2 to 64 microg per milliliter for fluconazole. Only a limited number of isolates from this outbreak have been tested to date; the MIC for voriconazole has ranged from 0.5 to 2 microg per milliliter.

How has this outbreak evolved?
------------------------------
Early in the outbreak, patients had symptoms of meningitis for weeks before the diagnosis was made. Neutrophilia in cerebrospinal fluid was extreme in many cases, and complications, including basilar-artery stroke, as in the case reported in the Journal (1) were common. After notifying patients at risk and performing lumbar punctures as soon as even mild headache occurred, clinicians began to see patients who had milder clinical disease. Headache is a prominent symptom and may be accompanied by neck stiffness, photophobia, and weakness. Whether some patients with mild symptoms may have worsening symptoms and complications in spite of antifungal therapy is unknown, but the hope is that early diagnosis and treatment will avert severe complications, such as strokes.

The incubation period for most patients has been 1 to 4 weeks after injection, but at least 1 patient presented at 6 weeks. It is not clear whether some of the less common manifestations, such as epidural abscess and osteoarticular infection, fall within this same time period. There have been reports of a few patients with increasing back pain as the only symptom of an epidural abscess, with or without diskitis or vertebral osteomyelitis. We know little about the progression of osteoarticular infection, since only a few cases of septic arthritis have been reported. Pain and swelling are likely to be the major symptoms. It appears that either the risk of development of infection is less or the symptoms are delayed and more subtle in comparison with a CNS infection. Most important, patients who have received epidural or intraarticular injections and their physicians should remain vigilant for symptoms beyond the typical period that has been reported to date.

When should spinal tap, joint aspiration, or imaging studies be performed?
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Patients should be alerted to tell their physician about any new-onset headache, neck stiffness, photophobia, fever, or strokelike symptoms. Because the symptoms of CNS fungal infection are often more subtle than those usually seen with bacterial meningitis, there should be a very low threshold for performing lumbar puncture if any symptom suggesting possible CNS infection occurs. Even with headache as the only symptom, values for cerebrospinal fluid have been abnormal in some patients. The criterion for initiating therapy should be a white-cell count above that which is considered normal (that is, greater than 5 cells per cubic millimeter). White-cell counts in patients in this outbreak of fungal meningitis have ranged from 13 cells to 15 000 cells per cubic millimeter almost always with a neutrophil predominance. There are not yet clear data correlating the clinical manifestations with the white-cell count in cerebrospinal fluid. Glucose and protein levels are not suggested as criteria for initiating therapy. Most important, empirical antifungal treatment should be given as soon as pleocytosis is detected in the cerebrospinal fluid, without waiting for results of diagnostic studies.

Increasing back pain or pain that differs in quality from the chronic back pain for which a patient received an epidural injection may be the only symptom of an epidural abscess, diskitis, or vertebral osteomyelitis. Magnetic resonance imaging of the spine should be performed in such patients, since early symptoms of these complications can be subtle, and localized infection may occur without meningitis. Any collection of epidural fluid should be aspirated, if possible, for culture and PCR studies.

Patients who received an intraarticular injection should be alert for new pain, especially if it differs in quality from their original pain, or if they have erythema or swelling of a joint. In such cases, aspiration of synovial fluid should be performed immediately for diagnostic studies. There is increased variability in what is considered a normal number of white cells in synovial fluid, and no firm guidance has been given for the number of cells required to initiate therapy. Clinical judgment must be used, with the symptoms and signs of joint disease before the injection taken into account. If there is any question of whether infection could be present, arthroscopy to obtain synovial fluid and possibly synovial biopsy for culture and PCR studies should be performed as soon as possible.

Patients who have no symptoms should not undergo lumbar puncture or joint aspiration. However, they should be told to call immediately if symptoms occur.

How should the infection be treated?
------------------------------------
Recommendations for the treatment of this rare infection are based on small case series, individual case reports, and personal experience. A large number of patients in this outbreak are older adults, many of whom have substantial coexisting illnesses that make therapeutic decisions challenging. Treatment recommendations will certainly evolve as clinicians gain more experience with managing these infections. Given the paucity of data pertaining to treatment and the complexity of management, decisions about the treatment of patients with proven or suspected infection should be made with the input of an infectious diseases specialist.

In the current outbreak, initial recommendations for therapy were to use high doses of both liposomal amphotericin B and voriconazole because the causative organism was not known and the index patient had been shown to have infection with _A. fumigatus_. As events moved forward, it quickly became evident that the primary pathogen was a black mold, and clinical experience had shown that an azole was the usual drug of choice for infection with such organisms. In addition, a large number of patients had serious toxic effects from the high doses of amphotericin B that were recommended. Thus, the therapeutic regimen was modified in favor of monotherapy with voriconazole, except for the sickest patients or those who had substantial side effects while receiving this agent, for whom amphotericin B could play a role.

Voriconazole was selected over posaconazole and itraconazole for several reasons. First and foremost, there is experience in the use of voriconazole for various mold infections. Both intravenous and oral formulations are available, and oral administration produces serum levels equivalent to those achieved by intravenous administration. Levels of the drug in cerebrospinal fluid are approximately 50 percent of serum levels (7) and levels both in cerebrospinal fluid and in serum are above the MIC for many dematiaceous molds. By comparison, neither posaconazole nor itraconazole achieves substantial levels in cerebrospinal fluid, and their oral absorption is erratic.

Current recommendations
Drugs and doses
---------------
For patients with mild or moderate CNS disease, the current recommendation is to administer voriconazole at a dose of 6 mg per kilogram of body weight twice daily. For patients with severe or refractory CNS disease, therapy with a combination of voriconazole (6 mg per kilogram twice daily) and intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (at a dose of 7.5 mg per kilogram daily) is recommended.

For patients with osteoarticular infection, a loading dose of voriconazole at 6 mg per kilogram for 2 doses, followed by 4 mg per kilogram twice daily, is recommended. The penetration of voriconazole into the joint space is excellent. The combination of voriconazole and liposomal amphotericin B (at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram daily) should be offered to patients with severe disease. The role of adjunctive surgery should not be underestimated in patients with osteoarticular mold infections (8).

Adverse effects
---------------
Voriconazole is associated with a host of drug-drug interactions. As an example, drugs that induce cytochrome P-450 (such as, rifampin, long-acting barbiturates, and carbamazepine) substantially decrease voriconazole levels. The coadministration of voriconazole with rifabutin or phenytoin not only leads to lower voriconazole levels but also may cause toxic serum levels of rifabutin and phenytoin. Voriconazole interferes with the metabolism of several other drugs, including cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus, and warfarin, leading to toxic levels. The coadministration of voriconazole and other agents, such as statins, benzodiazepines, calcium-channel blockers, sulfa drugs, and proton-pump inhibitors, should be done with care, with attention paid to decreasing the doses of these agents.

There is appropriate concern about the toxicity of voriconazole, particularly at the doses recommended to treat meningitis, which often leads to serum levels of more than 5 microg per milliliter. Visual hallucinations have been especially problematic in patients treated in this outbreak and appear to be related to high serum levels. Decreasing the dose of the drug will obviate this effect. Other adverse effects include visual disturbances (such as photopsia [the presence of perceived flashes of light - Mod.LL]), confusion, nausea, hepatic-enzyme elevation, rash, and photosensitivity. The administration of parenteral voriconazole in patients with impaired renal function may lead to the accumulation of the cyclodextrin component of the intravenous solution. There is growing evidence to suggest that accumulation of cyclodextrin in renal failure does not exacerbate underlying renal dysfunction, and if needed, voriconazole can be given intravenously (9).

Duration of therapy
-------------------
The duration of therapy is not known, but at this time, it is recommended that patients receive at least 3 months of antifungal therapy, and probably more for vertebral osteomyelitis. Therapy should continue until all clinical signs and symptoms have resolved and abnormal laboratory values have normalized.

Therapeutic drug monitoring
---------------------------
Therapeutic drug monitoring is an important aspect of antifungal therapy and is especially important in this outbreak, since there is little experience in treating this condition (10). The severity of the infection, the possibility of relatively decreased antifungal susceptibility, and the concentration-dependent toxicity of voriconazole make the measurement of serum antifungal drug levels extremely important. A voriconazole trough level of 2 to 5 microg per milliliter is recommended. Unpublished data from the Fungus Testing Laboratory at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio show that in 47 percent of more than 15 000 samples, voriconazole levels were 1 to 5 microg per milliliter, but 14 percent of samples had undetectable levels, and 15 percent had levels of more than 5 microg per milliliter. Of 167 measurements of cerebrospinal fluid, the median voriconazole level was 2.77 microg per milliliter, but there was substantial variability.

Treatment of patients with normal cerebrospinal fluid
-----------------------------------------------------
Should patients who have symptoms but are found to have fewer than 5 white cells per cubic millimeter in cerebrospinal fluid be treated? Without objective evidence of infection in the cerebrospinal fluid, treatment is not recommended. However, patients who have symptoms should be monitored closely, and if there is even subtle progression of symptoms, a repeat lumbar puncture should be performed immediately. If the number of white cells has increased, then empirical antifungal treatment should be initiated immediately.

Prophylaxis
-----------
What should we tell patients who would like to be treated with an antifungal agent to prevent infection? The agents used for treatment are amphotericin B and voriconazole. It is unlikely that anyone would consider using amphotericin B for prophylaxis. Voriconazole is less toxic, but adverse effects have been encountered frequently in patients treated for CNS infection in this outbreak, and drug-drug interactions are many, as noted above. Another concern is that the prophylactic use of antifungal agents may delay the onset or change the course of the disease so that it appears months later and the organism may have become resistant to the agent used.

Summary
-------
This outbreak of fungal meningitis caused by contaminated methylprednisolone used for epidural injections is evolving rapidly and now involves more than 200 patients. The primary pathogen appears to be _E. rostratum_, but it is possible that other pathogens could emerge, and it remains a mystery as to why the index case is the sole case in which _A. fumigatus_ was detected. It is encouraging to note that clinically apparent disease has developed in only a small percentage of exposed patients. Management recommendations will almost assuredly change as more information becomes available regarding the pathogenesis of these infections.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[An excellent summary of this continuing saga. The references can be seen in the original article at the source URL above. - Mod.LL]

******
[3]
Date: Sun 21 Oct 2012
Source: The Seattle Times, The Washington Post report [edited]
http://seattletimes.com/html/nationworld/2019491935_meningtitis22.html


The outbreak of fungal meningitis linked to contaminated steroid injections represents a forced march into unexplored medical territory. Most fungal infections occur on the skin and are easily treated. Inhaling fungus-contaminated dust sometimes causes pneumonia in healthy people. Fungal infections in the brain, however, are almost always confined to people whose immunity has been suppressed by AIDS, cancer, burns or organ transplantation.

What's under way now, a new form of fungal meningitis in 281 otherwise healthy people, is an event without precedent. To date, 23 people have died. New cases appear every day. In all, 14 000 people in 23 states received injections around the spine or a joint with the anti-inflammatory drug methylprednisolone acetate from 3 contaminated lots distributed by a Massachusetts company.

"This kind of fungal meningitis has not been reported in the medical literature. There is not enough data to say whether it will be more or less responsive to treatment. We don't know what the outcomes generally are," said Benjamin Park, a physician in the fungal-diseases branch of the CDC.

"The truth of the matter is that we don't have any experience with this," said Arturo Casadevall, an expert on fungal infections and chairman of microbiology and immunology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, in New York.

Fungal infections of the brain are as feared as they are rare. They come on slowly and are hard to diagnose. They require at least 3 months of therapy with often unpleasant drugs. Treatment failure is common. Survivors are often left with disabilities.

The infections are rare, in part, because most fungi don't grow at body temperature. _Exserohilum rostratum_, the organism responsible for all but a few of the current cases, is an exception. One of the reasons they are difficult to treat is that fungal cells are similar to human cells in many structures and enzymes that are targets for antimicrobial drugs.

"The last thing you would think of when you look at a fungus is, 'I have a lot in common with that organism,'" said Robert Cramer, a molecular mycologist at Dartmouth Medical School. "But we have many more genes and proteins in common with fungi than we do with bacteria. Animals and fungi are more closely related than animals and plants."

Some fungi are especially hard to kill because they produce melanin, one of nature's strangest protective substances. Melanin is best known as the pigment that darkens skin and protects it from the damaging effects of too much sunlight. Its usefulness was discovered via single-cell organisms. Fungal species that grow on leaves and grass (as _Exserohilum rostratum_ does) make it for the same reason people do -- to protect against ultraviolet light. In fact, melanin absorbs virtually all wavelengths (which is why it is black) and some ionizing radiation. Melanin inactivates "free radicals," which are highly reactive chemicals made by cells of the immune system and used as molecular hand grenades to punch holes in bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens. Granules of melanin in the cell walls of fungi also absorb certain substances -- including many drugs -- preventing them from gaining access to the interior.

"Imagine putting activated charcoal on the outside -- it's kind of like that," Casadevall said.

As it turns out, a few antifungal drugs aren't stopped by melanin. One of them is voriconazole, which is being used to treat the meningitis patients.

Some of the meningitis patients have suffered strokes, especially in the back of the brain -- the 1st stop for organisms migrating up the spinal canal. The fungus invades blood vessels, which clot off and deprive brain tissue of oxygen and blood flow. Cramer thinks that fungal cells may be able to detect oxygen "gradients" -- minute changes in concentration -- in the cerebrospinal fluid they are floating in. The cells then grow toward the source -- oxygen-rich capillaries -- like slow-moving sharks homing in on bleeding swimmer. It's a hypothesis he's now exploring in his laboratory.

[Byline: David Brown]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Related to the date of reporting (not date of onset), the number of cases, number of states involved, and deaths are:

Date of report / Cases / States / Deaths
----------------------------------------
2 Oct 2012 / 12 / 2 / 2
4 Oct 2012 / 26 / 5 / 4
5 Oct 2012 / 35 / 5 / 5 (9 more cases, 1 more death)
6 Oct 2012 / 64 / 9 / 7 (29 more cases, 2 more deaths)
7 Oct 2012 / 91 / 9 / 7 (27 more cases, 0 more deaths)
8 Oct 2012 / 101 / 9 / 8 (10 more cases, 1 more death)
9 Oct 2012 / 119 / 10 / 11 (18 more cases, 3 more deaths)
10 Oct 2012 / 137 / 10 / 12 (28 more cases, 1 more death)
11 Oct 2012 / 170 / 11 / 14 (33 more cases, 2 more deaths)
12 Oct 2012 / 185 / 11 / 14 (14 more CNS, 1st joint, 0 more deaths)
13 Oct 2012 / 198 / 13 / 15 (13 more CNS cases, 1 more death)
14 Oct 2012 / 205 / 14 / 15 (6 more CNS cases, 2nd joint, 0 more deaths)
15 Oct 2012 / 214 / 15 / 15 (9 more CNS cases, 0 more deaths)
16 Oct 2012 / 233 / 15 / 15 (19 more CNS cases, 0 more deaths)
17 Oct 2012 / 247 / 15 / 19 (14 more CNS cases, 4 more deaths)
18 Oct 2012 / 257 / 16 / 20 (9 more CNS cases, 3rd joint, 1 more death)
19 Oct 2012 / 271 / 16 / 21 (14 more CNS cases, 1 more death)
20 Oct 2012 / 284 / 16 / 23 (13 more CNS cases, 2 more death)
21 Oct 2012 / 285 / 16 / 23 ( 1 more CNS case, 0 more deaths)
22 Oct 2012 / 297 / 16 / 23 (12 more CNS cases, 0 more deaths)
Case fatality rate: 7.7 percent

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/1hiS. - Mod.LL]
See Also
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (07) 20121019.1352403
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (06) 20121019.1348974
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (05) 20121017.1347138
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (04): more medications 20121016.1345302
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (03): Exserohilum 20121015.1344312
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA (02): Exserohilum 20121014.1341916
Fungal infection, contaminated drug - USA: Exserohilum 20121014.1341591
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (09): Exserohilum 20121011.1337615
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (08) 20121011.1335715
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (07) 20121010.1333926
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (06): CDC advice 20121009.1333004
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (05) 20121008.1330309
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (04): more cases, 2nd fungus 20121007.1328893
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (03): contaminated drug 20121005.1326188
Aspergillus meningitis - USA (02): contaminated drug 20121004.1322744
Aspergillus meningitis - USA: (TN, NC) contaminated drug 20121002.1320024
2002
----
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA (03) 20021212.6046
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA: alert (02) 20021117.5831
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA: alert 20021002.5444
.................................................ll/mj/jw
</body>
