<header id=060474>
Published Date: 2015-08-12 13:57:16 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - Italy: (PU)
Archive Number: 20150812.3574561
</header>
<body id=060474>
CREUTZFELDT-JACOB DISEASE - ITALY: (APULIA)
******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 11 Aug 2015
Source: Beef World [abridged & edited]
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/08/10/is-mad-cow-rearing-its-ugly-head-again-italian-deaths-raise-alarms.html


2 mysterious Creutzfeldt-Jacob deaths in Italy have officials scrambling to stop the fear of tainted beef from spreading.

Nothing kills the appetite for a thick, juicy T-bone steak like the mention of mad cow disease. So it's little wonder that in the southern Italian region of Puglia, medical and veterinary officials are quickly playing down the fact that 2 people have died in the last 10 days from confirmed cases of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, a neurological disorder with strains that were associated with mad cow disease in the 1980s and 90s.

The cases occurred in an area known as the Salento, in the southernmost section of the heel of Italy's boot. What is known is that the victims, a 49 year old woman and a 67 year old man, lived just 21 kilometers apart and frequented the same areas for groceries and food markets. They both fell ill in mid-July 2015 with classic neurological symptoms and they both succumbed to the disease at the same area hospital where they were being treated last week.

What is not known is whether or not they contracted Creutzfeldt-Jacob from beef infected with the bovine spongiform encephalopathy known as mad cow disease, or mucca pazza in Italy, or whether it was the result of coincidental genetic predispositions or some other factor. On Monday, local officials announced that they had definitively ruled out the contraction of the disease from blood transfusions because neither victim had been given blood recently (nor had either donated blood to local blood banks). They have not yet ruled out whether the disease came from eating infected beef.

Those results could come in 2 weeks' time when analyses from brain tissue from each victim are complete, but Canio Buonavoglia, director general of the Istituto zooprofilattico sperimentale of Puglia and Basilicata, in Foggia says there is nothing to worry about. "I think I can say that the meat in Italy is hyper-controlled," Buonavoglia told the Gazzetta di Mezzogiorno in Lecce. "The industry in Italy, thanks to the ministry and veterinary epidemiologists, is very, very controlled."

Still, the local health authority is concerned about what appears to be a higher incidence of Creutzfeldt-Jacob in the Salento than in other areas of Italy and Europe. Not all victims die from the disease, and the brain tissue test that defines the root cause can only be conducted post-mortem, so it is not always easy to definitively test all sufferers, says Giovanni Gorgoni, head of the ASL (local health authority) in Lecce. He says while he will wait for the definitive results from the latest victims, he believes that tainted meat is not the culprit. "The thing that most concerns us instead is the high incidence of cases -- much higher than the national and regional average," he says, noting that there are 4 confirmed cases per million people in the Salento so far in 2015.

One family member of a recent victim accused the local trade authorities of allowing importing of cheaper, banned beef from the nearby Balkans, where EU controls aren't in place. There were nearly 10 cases per million in 2013 (the average for all of Puglia is 1.7 cases per million). There were no reported cases in 2014. "The data that suggest the presence of a particular cluster in the Salento merit investigation," he says. "Especially with the negligible share of cases linked to genetic causes. The unknown factors call for a targeted analysis and urgent consultation with the national health ministry."

The fear of the return of mad cow comes just as Coldiretti, Italy's main agricultural union, won a crucial battle with the nation's minister of health and the European Union to allow many banned beef products back on the table. This summer, for example, veal pajata (cooked intestines of baby calves) is back on the menu in traditional beef restaurants for the first time in 14 years. In 2001, acting out of an abundance of caution, Italy's health and agricultural ministries outlawed the dish, which was replaced with an inferior pajata made from lamb intestines. Italian beef is not widely exported, though its cured ham and pork products are commonly found in North America.

It will likely take a direct link between the Creutzfeldt-Jacob deaths and the beef industry to instigate further studies, especially into what many fear could be widespread corruption when it comes to the controls meant to keep beef safe. Even with the recent deaths, Buonavoglia says cattle yards' records are not always checked for incidents of spontaneous deaths among the herds.

And while two deaths is not an epidemic, it is still worrying for beef eaters and cattle farmers. When asked if he would eat beef in Puglia,
Buonavoglio admitted he is a vegetarian. "The beef is safe, though," he says. "Nothing bad will happen if you eat it."

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A number of subtypes of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) exist, all with slight variations in signs and symptoms. Yet the various forms of the disease are more alike than they are different, and everyone affected by CJD must eventually contend with serious mental and physical problems. Typical 1st symptoms include personality changes like anxiety and depression, memory loss, confusion and impaired thinking. Difficulties with balance and coordination as well as involuntary, jerking movements are also very common. People eventually lose the ability to move and speak. Pneumonia and other infections often occur in these patients and can lead to death.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is caused when proteinaceous particles called prions attack the brain, leading to mental deterioration and, ultimately, death. It can be transmitted via contaminated surgical equipment (iatrogenic CJD). Classical CJD can be either sporadic (of unknown origin), inherited (familial), or variant CJD (vCJD) believed to have originated from a prion responsible for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and transmitted to humans through consumption of contaminated meat.

In total, 209 cases of variant CJD cases had been identified in 11 countries (as of 2008). Most (176) were recorded in the Untied Kingdom (UK). During the period when these 176 vCJD cases were identified, there were 1640 cases of other forms of CJD identified in the UK. That is, even at the height of the vCJD epidemic, cases of vCJD were rare. No cases of vCJD have been identified in the UK since 2011.

Prion particles are highly resistant to even the most stringent sterilisation procedures, and it has been recommended that instruments employed in surgery involving CJD patients should be discarded and never reused.

In the 2 cases of CJD observed in Italy (Puglia) there is neither circumstantial nor any other type of evidence to associate the disease with the consumption of meat (contaminated or otherwise). Likewise these two cases cannot be attributed directly to consumption of animal products from the neighbouring Balkan countries. It seems likely that these 2 cases are linked only circumstantially. However further investigation would be appropriate, and ProMED-mail would welcome a statement of the outcome of further studies.

There is no direct information to associate these 2 cases with exposure to the bovine spongiform encephalopathy agent (BSE). - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3574561,16580.]
See Also
2013
----
Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease - Ireland: transmission risk 20130720.1834907
2006
----
CJD, transmission risk - Canada (ON) 20061207.3457
2003
---
CJD, iatrogenic dura mater grafts, update - Japan 20031204.2987
CJD, iatrogenic: strain differences 20030718.1765
2002
---
CJD, iatrogenic dura mater graft - South Africa (02) 20020625.4604
CJD, iatrogenic dura mater graft - South Africa: conf 20020625.4594
CJD, iatrogenic dura mater graft - South Africa:susp 20020623.4576
2000
---
CJD (new var.), iatrogenic dental transmission risk 20000808.1328
1998
---
CJD (new var.), possibly iatrogenic - France 19980110.0070
1996
---
CJD iatrogenic 19961018.1753
.................................................sb/cp/pg/sh
</body>
