<header id=003361>
Published Date: 2019-04-27 19:38:49 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Konzo disease - Congo DR: cassava poisoning
Archive Number: 20190427.6443887
</header>
<body id=003361>
KONZO DISEASE - DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO: CASSAVA POISONING
***************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 24 Apr 2019
Source: Digital Congo [in French, machine trans., edited]
https://www.digitalcongo.net/article/5cc068056ae724000435150a/


Konzo, a food-borne illness that paralyzes the legs and back, has been raging in Feshi territory in southwestern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)'s Kwango province for several months, the ACP Director General of the Higher Pedagogical Institute (ISP) of Feshi, Professor Simon Masaki, staying in Kinshasa, said here Tuesday [23 Apr 2019].

This disease, he said, particularly affects children and adolescents aged 4 to 18 years. Many children are paralyzed and abandoned to their plight, he lamented. Many families are plunged into distress because of this situation.

The Feshi Hospital Center, which is not well equipped, is not able to take care of these many cases of Konzo, he said. Professor Masaki makes a strong appeal to the provincial and national authorities and partners of the DRC to come to the rescue of the population of Feshi, which is landlocked and very difficult to access. Feshi is located 385 km [239 mi] from Kenge, capital of the Kwango province, and more than 700 km [435 mi] from Kinshasa, capital of the DRC.

Konzo is a disease attacking the lower limbs and spine, causing a deplorable and often irreversible physical deformity. This disease is caused by the consumption of a very bitter cassava variety that would normally remain soaked in water for at least 4 days to remove cyanide before being consumed.

But many people do not respect this deadline. The territory of Kahemba, in the same province of Kwango, was hit in 2018 by Konzo.

Dr. Sadiki Ngeleza of the School of Public Health of the University of Kinshasa conducts field studies on Konzo disease, funded by the National Institutes of Health through the Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU), to determine the biological risk factors associated with Konzo and the role of nutritional factors in susceptibility to Konzo.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

["Konzo is an epidemic paralytic disease occurring among hunger-stricken rural populations in Africa where a diet dominated by insufficiently processed cassava results in simultaneous malnutrition and high dietary cyanide intake.

"Konzo has been reported in outbreaks mainly among women and children in remote rural populations in DR Congo, Mozambique (where it is known as mantakassa), Tanzania, Central African Republic, Cameroon and Angola." (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Konzo).

It is unfortunate ProMED-mail posting Undiagnosed paralytic illness - Rep. of Congo: (PN), RFI: 20101102.3973 was an unanswered RFI. This disease is well known to be associated with cassava and high cyanide intake from consuming inappropriately prepared cassava. As noted in this article, the cassava MUST be correctly prepared, including a lengthy soaking to prevent the toxicity and paralysis from occurring.

ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall has suggested this is another disease in the DRC needing attention, more than just studying it. While international responders are seen to rush to control Ebola, people suffer from other diseases without attention or assistance. Is it any wonder they are suspicious?

This rapporteur asks a valid question. Some on-the-ground observers have commented the Ebola control campaign would have greater public acceptance if it were part of a broad health initiative dealing with the many diseases affecting this population. But such an approach would require much greater medical capacity than is likely currently available or perhaps has ever been available. However, a more global approach to the things affecting these groups of people may be met with more acceptance.

Cassava (_Manihot esculenta_) is a root crop widely consumed in Africa and South America. Although it originated in Brazil (where it is called manioc), it was brought to Africa by Portuguese colonists, and it is now an important crop there and in Indonesia and Southeast Asia. It is the principal source of nutrition for about 500 million people. Its leaves are edible, but the prize is its starchy root, rich in protein, minerals, and vitamins A, B, and C.

Cassava is used in a vast variety of cakes, snacks, and desserts and grows wild in many places, being tough and drought-resistant. In a country where hunger is now a reality for many poor households, cassava is among those food crops that can make the crucial difference between starvation and survival. The cassava plant is the world's 3rd most important crop. Cassava enters the North American diet also -- as it is made into tapioca.

Surprising for an important edible plant, cassava is quite poisonous without proper preparation. The toxin in cassava is called linamarin. When eaten raw or inadequately prepared, the human digestive system will convert this to cyanide. Even 2 cassava roots contain a fatal dose of poison. While the bitter variety (white cassava) of the plant has larger concentrations of cyanide than the sweet variety (yellow cassava), the sweet cassava is not without risk.

To prepare cassava, it is peeled and grated and soaked in warm water for several days. This allows the cassava's own natural enzyme (linamarase) to convert the cyanogen linamarin to sugar and cyanide gas, and the volatile gas disperses usually harmlessly. However, women -- who are usually charged with processing the plant -- can be sickened by inhaling cyanide gas. What remains after processing can be boiled and eaten, or more usually, dried and ground.

The main toxic principle that occurs in varying amounts in all parts of the cassava plant is a chemical compound called linamarin (Nartey, 1981; for complete bibliographic details of this and other references in this section, see http://www.fao.org/3/t0207e/T0207E0e.htm#Bibliography). It often coexists with its methyl homologue called methyl-linamarin or lotaustralin. Linamarin is a cyanogenic glycoside which is converted to toxic hydrocyanic acid or prussic acid when it comes into contact with linamarase, an enzyme that is released when the cells of cassava roots are ruptured. Otherwise linamarin is a rather stable compound which is not changed by boiling the cassava. If it is absorbed from the gut to the blood as the intact glycoside, it is probably excreted unchanged in the urine without causing any harm to the organism (Philbrick, 1977). However, ingested linamarin can liberate cyanide in the gut during digestion.

Hydrocyanic acid or HCN is a volatile compound. It evaporates rapidly in the air at temperatures over 28 deg C (82.4 deg F) and dissolves readily in water. It may easily be lost during transport, storage and analysis of specimens. The normal range of cyanogen content of cassava tubers falls between 15 and 400 mg HCN/kg fresh weight (Coursey, 1973). The concentration varies greatly between varieties and also with environmental and cultural conditions. The concentration of the cyanogenic glycosides increases from the centre of the tuber outwards (Bruijn, 1973). Generally the cyanide content is substantially higher in the cassava peel. Bitterness is not necessarily a reliable indicator of cyanide content.

Traditional processing and cooking methods for cassava can, if efficiently carried out, reduce the cyanide content to non-toxic levels. An efficient processing method will release the enzyme linamarase by disintegrating the microstructure the cassava root. On bringing this enzyme into contact with linamarin, the glucoside is converted into hydrogen cyanide. The liberated cyanide will dissolve in the water when fermentation is effected by prolonged soaking, and will evaporate when the fermented cassava is dried. Sun drying fresh cassava pieces for short periods is an inefficient detoxification process. Cyanide will not be completely liberated, and the enzyme will be destroyed during drying. Sun drying processing techniques reduce only 60% to 70% of the total cyanide content in the first 2 months of preservation. Cyanide residues can be quite high in the dry tubers, from 30 to 100 mg/kg (Casadei, 1988). Simple boiling of fresh root pieces is not always reliable since the cyanide may be only partially liberated, and only part of the linamarin may be extracted in the cooking water. The reduction of cyanides depends on whether the product is placed in cold water (27 deg C/81 deg F) or directly into boiling water (100 deg C/212 deg F). After 30 minutes cooking, the remaining cyanides are, in the 1st case, 8% of the initial value, and in the 2nd case about 30% (Easers, 1986).

Symptoms appear 4 hours after consumption of raw or insufficiently processed cassava and consist of vertigo, vomiting, collapse, and in some cases death within 1 or 2 hours. Treatment is quite effective and cheap. The principle is to increase the detoxicating capacity of the patient by giving an intravenous injection of thiosulphate and thereby making more sulphur available for conversion of cyanide to thiocyanate.

Please note there is no mention of diarrhea occurring almost immediately after ingestion with cassava poisoning. So it is possible this may be some other toxin associated with the meal or some bacterial contamination. Most cassava poisoning patients report tingling in the extremities, and this article does not mention that as clinical sign.

The shelf life of a cassava root is quite short once it is removed from the stem, so there's an urgency to get the food to market. Roots can turn to mush in less than a week. The rush to get cassava to the market may keep some batches of cassava from being processed properly.

Chronic, low-level cyanide exposure is associated with the development of goiter and with tropical ataxic neuropathy, a nerve-damaging disorder that renders a person unsteady and uncoordinated. Severe cyanide poisoning, particularly during famines, when there is obviously pressure to process the cassava more rapidly, is associated with outbreaks of a debilitating, irreversible paralytic disorder called konzo and, in some cases, death. The incidence of konzo and tropical ataxic neuropathy can be as high as 3% in some areas of Africa.

In an effort to avoid this toxicity, it has been reported by Siritunga and Sayre (1) that transgenic cassava free of cyanogens can be produced. The investigators generated transgenic plants in which cytochrome oxidase enzymes that catalyze the 1st step in linamarin synthesis are inhibited. The plants showed a 94% reduction in leaf linamarin content and a 99% decrease in root linamarin levels. Additionally, the same group (2) has reported that transgenic cassava plants can be produced that overexpress the gene for hydroxynitrile lyase, facilitating cyanogenesis during processing and producing a final product with less risk. The tubers of cassava do not have this enzyme, and processing relies on spontaneous conversion. Combining these methods could further decrease the risk of cyanide poisoning from cassava.

The roots of cassava are rich in carbohydrates, mainly starch. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization, cassava is the 3rd most important source of calories in the tropics, after rice and corn. Cassava is consumed in a variety of ways, including eaten as whole root, grated root or root chips. In addition, it is prepared into flour, which in turn can be used for cooking or production of cassava-based products such as breads, crackers, and puddings or beverages made with tapioca pearls. Cassava leaves are also eaten in some countries following extensive boiling. Apart from being used as human food, cassava products are also used as animal feed.

Cassava contains more than one form of cyanogenic glycosides. Different varieties of cassava are generally classified into 2 main types: sweet cassava and bitter cassava. Sweet cassava roots contain less than 50 mg/kg hydrogen cyanide on fresh weight basis, whereas that of the bitter variety may contain up to 400 mg/kg.

Sweet cassava roots can generally be made safe to eat by peeling and thorough cooking. However, bitter cassava roots require more extensive processing. One of the traditional ways to prepare bitter cassava roots is by peeling and grating the roots, and then prolonged soaking of the gratings in water to allow leaching and fermentation to take place, followed by thorough cooking to release the volatile hydrogen cyanide gas. Cutting the roots into small pieces, followed by soaking and boiling in water is particularly effective in reducing the cyanide content in cassava. Whilst fresh cassava requires traditional methods to reduce its toxicity, adequately processed cassava flour and cassava-based products have very low cyanide contents and are considered safe to use.

Cyanogenic glycosides are a group of chemical compounds which occur naturally in over 2000 plant species. There are at least 25 cyanogenic glycosides known to be found in the edible parts of plants. Cyanogenic glycosides alone are relatively non-toxic. However, as a result of enzymatic hydrolysis by beta-glucosidase following maceration of plant tissues as they are eaten, or by the gut microflora, cyanogenic glycosides are broken down to release hydrogen cyanide which is toxic to both animals and humans. The potential toxicity of a cyanogenic plant depends primarily on its capacity to produce hydrogen cyanide.

In humans, the clinical signs of acute cyanide intoxication include rapid respiration, drop in blood pressure, rapid pulse, dizziness, headache, stomach pain, vomiting, diarrhea, mental confusion, twitching and convulsions. Death due to cyanide poisoning can occur when the cyanide level exceeds the limit an individual is able to detoxify. The acute lethal dose of hydrogen cyanide for humans is reported to be 0.5 to 3.5 mg/kg of body weight. Children are particularly at risk because of their smaller body size.

Chronic cyanide intoxication may lead to the development of certain conditions including disturbance of thyroid function and neurological disorders. It tends to affect those individuals who have regular long-term consumption of cassava with poor nutrition status.

References
1. Siritunga D, Sayre RT: Generation of cyanogen-free transgenic cassava. Planta 2003;217:367-73.
2. Siritunga D, Arias-Garzon D, White W, Sayre RT: Over-expression of hydroxynitrile lyase in transgenic cassava roots accelerates cyanogenesis and food detoxification. Plant Biotechnol 2004;2:37-43.

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://www.cfs.gov.hk/english/multimedia/multimedia_pub/multimedia_pub_fsf_19_01.html and http://www.fao.org/docrep/t0207e/t0207e08.htm. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
Congo DR: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6443887,194]
See Also
2015
----
Konzo disease - Zambia: cassava poisoning 20150811.3570038
Foodborne illness - Nigeria: (EB) cassava susp., RFI 20150327.3258703
2012
----
Foodborne illness, fatal - Namibia: (OS) cassava susp. 20120228.1054814
2011
----
Undiagnosed disease, fatal - Philippines (02): (ZN) 20110707.2053
Undiagnosed disease, fatal - Philippines: (ZN) 20110703.2021
2010
----
Undiagnosed paralytic illness - Rep. of Congo: (PN), RFI: 20101102.3973
Konzo, food-borne paralysis - Congo DR 20100402.1059
2007
----
Konzo, cassava foodborne paralysis - Cameroon: refugees 20071203.3904
1999
----
Konzo - Congo, Dem.Rep. 19990821.1451
.................................................tg/rd/ml
</body>
