<header id=035696>
Published Date: 2011-09-02 13:40:38 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza (51): swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, children
Archive Number: 20110902.2685
</header>
<body id=035696>
INFLUENZA (51): SWINE-ORIGIN H3N2 REASSORTANT, CHILDREN
*******************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 2 Sep 2011
Source: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011; 60(early release): 1-4
[abridged, edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm60e0902a1.htm?s_cid=mm60e0902a1_e&source=govdelivery


Swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus infection in 2 children
-------------------------------------------------------------
Influenza A viruses are endemic in many animal species, including
humans, swine, and wild birds, and sporadic cases of transmission of
influenza A viruses between humans and animals do occur, including
human infections with avian-origin influenza A viruses (that is, H5N1
and H7N7) and swine-origin influenza A viruses (that is, H1N1, H1N2,
and H3N2) (1). Genetic analysis can distinguish animal origin
influenza viruses from the seasonal human influenza viruses that
circulate widely and cause annual epidemics. This report describes 2
cases of febrile respiratory illness caused by swine-origin influenza
A (H3N2) viruses identified on 19 Aug 2011 and 26 Aug 2011, and the
current investigations. No epidemiologic link between the 2 cases has
been identified, and although investigations are ongoing, no
additional confirmed human infections with this virus have been
detected. These viruses are similar to 8 other swine-origin influenza
A (H3N2) viruses identified from previous human infections over the
past 2 years, but are unique in that one of the 8 gene segments
(matrix [M] gene) is from the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus. The
acquisition of the M gene in these 2 swine-origin influenza A (H3N2)
viruses indicates that they are "reassortants" because they contain
genes of the swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus circulating in
North American pigs since 1998 (2) and the 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
virus that might have been transmitted to pigs from humans during the
2009 H1N1 pandemic. However, reassortments of the 2009 influenza A
(H1N1) virus with other swine influenza A viruses have been reported
previously in swine (3). Clinicians who suspect influenza virus
infection in humans with recent exposure to swine should obtain a
nasopharyngeal swab from the patient for timely diagnosis at a state
public health laboratory and consider empiric neuraminidase inhibitor
antiviral treatment to quickly limit potential human transmission
(4).

Case reports
------------
Patient A -- On 17 Aug 2011, the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention [CDC] was notified by the Indiana State
Department of Health Laboratories of a suspected case of swine-origin
influenza A (H3N2) infection in a boy aged <5 years. The boy, who had
received influenza vaccine in September 2010, experienced onset of
fever, cough, shortness of breath, diarrhea, and sore throat on 23 Jul
2011. He was brought to a local emergency department (ED) where a
respiratory specimen later tested positive for influenza A (H3). The
boy was discharged home, but was not treated with influenza antiviral
medications. He has multiple chronic health conditions, returned to
the ED on 24 Jul 2011, and was hospitalized for treatment of those
health problems, which had worsened. The boy was discharged home on 27
Jul 2011, and has since recovered from this illness. As part of
routine CDC-supported influenza surveillance, the respiratory specimen
collected on 24 Jul 2011, was forwarded to the Indiana State
Department of Health Laboratories, where polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing identified a suspect swine-origin influenza A (H3N2)
virus on 17 Aug 2011. The specimen was forwarded to CDC where the
findings were confirmed through genome sequencing on 19 Aug 2011.

No direct exposure to swine was identified for this child; however, a
caretaker reported direct contact with asymptomatic swine in the weeks
before the boy's illness onset and provided care to the child 2 days
before illness onset. No respiratory illness was identified in any of
the child's family or close contacts, the boy's caretaker, or in the
family or contacts of the caretaker.

Patient B -- On 24 Aug 2011, CDC was notified by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health of a suspected case of swine-origin influenza A
(H3N2) virus infection in a girl aged <5 years. The girl, who had
received influenza vaccine in September 2010, experienced acute onset
of fever, nonproductive cough, and lethargy on 20 Aug 2011. She was
brought to a local hospital ED where a nasopharyngeal swab tested
positive for influenza A by rapid influenza diagnostic test. She was
not treated with influenza antiviral medications and was discharged
home the same day. The girl has completely recovered from this
illness.

A nasopharyngeal swab and nasal wash specimen were obtained at the ED
and forwarded to the Pennsylvania State Department of Health Bureau of
Laboratories for additional testing as part of routine CDC-supported
influenza surveillance. On 29 Aug 2011, the state public health
laboratory identified a suspected swine-origin influenza A (H3N2)
virus by PCR testing, and both specimens were forwarded to CDC. On 26
Aug 2011, genome sequencing confirmed the virus as swine-origin
influenza A (H3N2). On 16 Aug 2011, the girl was reported to have
visited an agricultural fair where she had direct exposure to swine
and other animals. No additional illness in the girl's family or close
contacts has been identified, but illness in other fair attendees
continues to be investigated. No additional confirmed swine-origin
influenza virus infections have been identified thus far.

Epidemiologic and laboratory investigations
-------------------------------------------
As of 2 Sep 2011, no epidemiologic link between patients A and B had
been identified, and no additional cases of confirmed infection with
the identified strain of swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus had
been identified. Surveillance data from both states showed low levels
of influenza activity at the time of both patients' illnesses. Case
and contact investigations by the county and state human and animal
health agencies in Indiana and Pennsylvania are ongoing, and enhanced
surveillance for additional human cases is being implemented in both
states.

Preliminary genetic characterization of these 2 influenza viruses has
identified them as swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) viruses. Full
genome sequences have been posted to publicly available Web sites. The
viruses are similar, but not identical to each other. 7 of the 8 gene
segments, including the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)
genes, are similar to those of swine H3N2 influenza viruses
circulating among U.S. pigs since 1998 (2) and previously identified
in the 8 other sporadic cases of human infection with swine-origin
influenza A (H3N2) viruses in the United States since 2009 [Additional
information is available at
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/pastreports.htm]. The one notable
difference from the viruses previously identified in human infections
with swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus is that these 2 viruses
have a matrix (M) gene acquired from the 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
virus, replacing the classical swine M gene present in the prior 8
swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus infections in humans.

Although reassortment between swine influenza and 2009 influenza A
(H1N1) viruses has been reported in pigs in the United States (3),
this particular genetic combination of swine influenza virus segments
is unique and has not been reported previously in either swine or
humans, based on a review of influenza genomic sequences publicly
available in GenBank. Analysis of data submitted to GenBank via the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Swine Influenza Virus Surveillance
Program subsequent to this case identified 2 additional influenza A
(H3N2) isolates from swine containing the M gene from the 2009
influenza A (H1N1) virus. Genome sequencing is under way to completely
characterize the genetic composition of these 2 swine influenza
isolates. (USDA Agricultural Research Service and USDA Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, unpublished data, 2011).

The viruses in these 2 patients are resistant to amantadine and
rimantadine, but are susceptible to the neuraminidase inhibitor drugs
oseltamivir and zanamivir. Because these viruses carry a unique
combination of genes, no information currently is available regarding
the capacity of this virus to transmit efficiently in swine, humans,
or between swine and humans.

MMWR editorial note
-------------------
>From 2005 to 2007, CDC received reports of about one human infection
with a swine-origin influenza virus each year. In 2007, human
infection with a novel influenza A virus, including swine-origin
influenza virus infections, became a nationally notifiable condition.
Since that time, CDC has received about 3 to 5 reports a year of human
infections with swine-origin influenza viruses. The recent increase in
reporting might be, in part, a result of increased influenza testing
capabilities in public health laboratories that allows for
identification of human and swine-origin influenza viruses, but
genetic changes in swine influenza viruses and other factors also
might be contributing to this increase (5--7). During December
2005--November 2010, before the 2 cases described in this report, 21
cases of human infection with swine-origin influenza were reported (12
cases with swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) virus infection, 8 cases
with swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus infection, and one case
with swine-origin influenza A (H1N2) virus infection). 6 of these 21
cases occurred in patients who reported direct exposure to pigs; 12
patients reported being near pigs; human-to-human transmission was
suspected in 2 cases after epidemiologic investigations revealed no
reported contact with swine in either case, but contact with ill
persons who reported swine exposure was the suspected source of
infection; the exposure in one case was unknown (8) (CDC, unpublished
data; 2011). Although the vast majority of human infections with
animal influenza viruses do not result in human-to-human transmission
(9,10), each case should be investigated fully to ascertain whether
these viruses are transmitted among humans and to limit further
exposure of humans to infected animals, if infected animals are
identified.

The lack of known direct exposure to pigs in one of the 2 cases
described in this report suggests the possibility that limited
human-to-human transmission of this influenza virus occurred. Likely
transmission of swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) virus from close
contact with an infected person has been observed in past
investigations of human infections with swine-origin influenza A
virus, but has not resulted in sustained human-to-human transmission.
Preliminary evidence from the investigation of the Indiana case shows
no ongoing transmission. No influenza illness has been identified, but
if additional chains of transmission are identified rapid intervention
is warranted try to prevent further spread of the virus. Clinicians
should consider swine-origin influenza A virus infection as well as
seasonal influenza virus infections in the differential diagnosis of
patients with febrile respiratory illness who have been near pigs.
Clinicians who suspect influenza virus infection in humans with recent
exposure to swine, should obtain a nasopharyngeal swab from the
patient, place the swab in a viral transport medium, contact their
state or local health department to facilitate transport and timely
diagnosis at a state public health laboratory, and consider empiric
neuraminidase inhibitor antiviral treatment (4).

[Interested readers should access the original document at the source
URL to view the references cited in the above text]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This report describes 2 cases of febrile respiratory illness caused
by swine-origin influenza A (H3N2) viruses identified on 19 Aug 2011
and 26 Aug 2011. The viruses identified in these cases are unique in
that one of the 8 gene segments (matrix [M] gene) is derived from the
2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus.

Non-human influenza virus infections rarely result in human-to-human
transmission, but the implications of sustained ongoing transmission
between humans is potentially severe; therefore, prompt and thorough
identification and investigation of these sporadic human infections
with non-human influenza viruses are needed to reduce the risk for
sustained transmission. The 2 children had been vaccinated in the
previous year and had no known contact.

Although reassortment between swine influenza and 2009 influenza A
(H1N1) viruses has been reported in pigs in the United States
[Duchatez MF, Hause B, Stigger-Rosser E, et al. Multiple reassortment
between pandemic (H1N1) 2009 and endemic influenza viruses in pigs,
United States. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011;17:1624-9], this particular
genetic combination of swine influenza virus segments is unique and
has not been reported previously in either swine or humans. There was
no evidence of onward transmission of this particular reassortant in
humans

Therefore clinicians should consider swine-origin influenza A virus
infection as well as seasonal influenza virus infections in the
differential diagnosis of patients with febrile respiratory illness
who have been near pigs. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza (50): Australia (NS) H275Y mutation cluster 20110825.2594
Influenza (49): China, narcolepsy 20110823.2561
Influenza (48): ACIP recommendations 20110818.2510
Influenza (47): ECDC report, virus characterization 20110816.2477
.................................................cp/ejp/sh
</body>
