<header id=035364>
Published Date: 2016-04-24 08:19:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Cattle fever tick - USA (TX) nilgai host
Archive Number: 20160424.4179632
</header>
<body id=035364>
CATTLE FEVER TICK - USA (TEXAS) NILGAI HOST
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 22 Apr 2016
Source: Houston Chronicle [edited]
http://www.houstonchronicle.com/business/article/Once-exotic-antelope-blamed-for-spread-of-cattle-7304864.php


The nilgai, a once-exotic antelope imported from Asia for zoos and let loose for trophy hunts on Texas ranches, is now being blamed for spreading the potentially devastating cattle fever tick the farthest into the United States interior in decades, possibly since it was declared eradicated in 1943.

The Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge in lower Cameron County, about 2 miles north of the Mexican border at the southernmost tip of Texas, is being called ground zero for infested nilgai and white-tailed deer, which also are hosts. The park came under quarantine after the tick was found on the carcasses of hunted game in 2014.

While the US has strict rules requiring infected animals to be quarantined and treated to keep the ticks from spreading, Mexico does not. And nilgai, cattle and other hosts for the nefarious fever tick roam unchecked across the border. The situation is especially grave because the animals are free-ranging and compromise ongoing eradication efforts such as systematic treatment or moving cattle out of infested pastures. According to the US Department of Agriculture, an extended tick outbreak could cost US ranchers and the broader economy more than USD 1.2 billion in extermination expenses and lost revenue from diseased animals.

It's estimated that 70 per cent of white-tailed deer and nearly 70 per cent of nilgai on the refuge are infested, prompting officials to require that animals killed by hunters be tested and skinned on site, freezing the heads that are kept for mounting for 24 hours to kill the ticks. In the past year, the US Department of Agriculture has contracted with helicopters and sharp shooters for aerial attacks that have so far killed about 200 of the nilgai.

More aerial harvests are planned for the nilgai, refuge manager Boyd Blihovde said. "We've already done in my opinion quite a lot, and we're going to continue do our part whenever we can," he said. But the damage may already have been done. Without natural wildlife predators, the nilgai population has exploded in South Texas, and female nilgai have been known to migrate as much as 30 miles.

Neal Wilkins, chief executive officer of the East Foundation, said 27 000 acres of the Foundation's 200 000-acre ranch in South Texas are under quarantine because the parcel is adjacent to an infested property. "It's kind of the front lines there in keeping the fever ticks from traveling north," he said. He counts the portion of State Highway 186 that runs east from Raymondville to the Gulf Coast town of Port Mansfield, his ranch's southern boundary, as the last natural barrier to infected nilgai migration. After that, he said, there are no natural barriers until Baffin Bay. In between are about 2 million acres of large ranchland that's at risk should the tick spread beyond Highway 186, including parts of the storied King Ranch, which is, at 825 000 acres, one of the world's largest ranches and, in a twist of irony, was one of the 1st to sport the nilgai.

Cattle fever ticks (_Rhipicephalus microplus_ and _Rhipicephalus annulatus_) are carriers of bovine babesiosis, or "cattle tick fever", which in the early 1900s wiped out 90 per cent of US cattle from Pennsylvania to California, causing about USD 130 million in losses.

Infected cattle experience bloody urine, diarrhea, fever and extreme anemia before dying. The antelope were imported from India as zoo animals and released in South Texas as prized game for hunters in the early 1900s, according to the Texas State Historical Commission. Tick fever was already a problem. The Texas Animal Health Commission was established in 1893 as the Livestock Sanitary Commission to try to get control of the disease. Through quarantines and dips -- the 1st was a petroleum solution from the Beaumont oil fields -- the fever tick was in 1943 declared eradicated save for a narrow permanent quarantine zone along the Rio Grande.

To aid the effort, a force of federally employed "tick riders" set out each day on horseback, patrolling 8- to 10-mile sectors to lasso cattle that swam the Rio Grande from Mexico into the U.S. and were possibly transporting the tick. Those measures helped keep it contained for 56 years. But in 1999, the ticks started to spread onto ranchland beyond the permanent quarantine lines.

Several factors were blamed. For one, tick riders were redeployed to help fight wildfires and other livestock disease outbreaks in other states, leaving areas unprotected from stray Mexican cattle. For another, the growing trend of stocking ranches with exotic game introduced a new class of hosts for the ticks.

In 2007, the US Department of Agriculture had to expand quarantine zones in 3 places. The largest, the "Carrizo Zone", extended deep into Dimmit County; the others were in Starr and Zapata counties. Those outbreaks have since mostly been contained, but the latest outbreak has livestock experts calling for a new approach.

The Texas Animal Health Commission said there were 15 infested properties in Cameron County and 8 in Willacy County as of 16 Feb 2016. The commission issued a proposed rule introducing a fever tick vaccine into the arsenal of dips, patrols and widespread inspections that ranchers say will be onerously expensive and impossible to administer.

Ty Keeling, a Pleasanton rancher, said a single roundup costs about USD 1750 per thousand acres. That covers 2 hours of helicopter time and 2 days of ranch hands on horseback trying to get what the helicopters miss. The TAHC didn't respond to requests for comment on the rule language.

The vaccine is derived from the gut of the tick, and produces an antibody response in the cattle that prevents the ticks from absorbing the proteins in the cows' blood. They essentially starve. "The reason for the proposed change is to authorize the TAHC to utilize the vaccine," agency spokeswoman Callie Ward said in an email. "The vaccine is not a silver bullet. The value of the vaccine is in its prolonged ability to kill or impair ticks to the point of not completing their life cycle, thereby greatly reducing the number of ticks in the environment."

Felix Guerrero, an insect physiologist at the USDA's Tick and Biting Fly Research Unit in Kerrville, said the ticks are damaging even if the cows don't manifest the disease. "The ticks feeding on wild animals or a cow do cause damage and do affect the animal's productivity and comfort, just from blood loss and irritation," he said. "They don't feed. They're uncomfortable."

Wilkins, of the East Foundation, said infected cows can do a rancher in. "The bottom line is if our cattle are positive for fever ticks, then it threatens international trade and threatens our ability to trade with other states," he said. But while cattle raisers support the vaccination program, they are incensed by language in the TAHC's rule that requires 100 per cent of a rancher's herd be rounded up and treated with a vaccine that requires 2 primary doses 28 days apart, with boosters every 6 months. Ranchers say the requirements aren't realistic and that it's time to rethink the rule, especially as the ticks encroach on areas with larger herds. "It's not economically possible to gather 100 percent of your cattle in those remote and rough conditions that you find in that big country in that part of South Texas," he said.

Keeling agreed, saying that even with helicopter and cowboy roundups, some cattle are going to be missed. Periodic roundups are considered a standard cost, but not if they have to be conducted for days on end, he said. "These are really large pastures," he said. "You can imagine you have a wet year like this year [2016], you have a lot of vegetation and lots of places they can hide."

[byline: Lynn Brezosky]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Joseph Dudley

[These ticks have long been a problem for Texas, and exotic game as a wild host has not improved the situation.

Controlling the tick is challenging and can be, as this article states, extremely expensive. Many in the tick zone and surrounding areas have very large areas that essentially require a helicopter to round up the cattle, so what TAHC is proposing is very expensive. Subsidies or some other type of working arrangement needs to be arrived at.

There are maps and an excellent explanation on the TAHC brochure to be found at http://www.tahc.state.tx.us/news/brochures/TAHCBrochure_FeverTick.pdf.

As an historical note, the cattle fever tick played a large role in the establishment of Texas A&M College of Veterinary Medicine. Dr Mark Francis, who was the 1st trained veterinarian at what was then the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, began by lecturing to agricultural students. Although he had no labs or equipment, Dr Francis made his mark in veterinary medicine when he proved the tick was the cause of Texas cattle fever (which had plagued southern livestock since the late 1700s) and developed inoculations against this devastating disease. More history of this tick and the Texas A&M College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences can be found at http://vetmed.tamu.edu/about-us/history. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4179632,245.]
See Also
2009
---
Texas cattle fever tick - USA: (TX) quarantine expanded 20090707.2435
2008
---
Texas cattle fever tick - USA (02): (TX) quarantine expanded 20080705.2046
Texas cattle fever tick - USA: (TX), quarantine expanded 20080418.1384
2007
---
Texas cattle fever tick - USA (TX): quarantine extended 20071005.3292
.................................................tg/msp/sh
</body>
