<header id=037364>
Published Date: 2022-06-11 21:19:01 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Feline infectious peritonitis - Turkey (02): (IB) stray cat
Archive Number: 20220612.8703817
</header>
<body id=037364>
FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITONITIS - TURKEY (02): (ISTANBUL) STRAY CAT
*****************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Source: a subscriber whose identity is known to ProMED, but who prefers to remain unnamed [edited]


The information reported in the previous ProMED posting [Feline infectious peritonitis - Turkey: (IB) stray cat 20220605.8703682] is very interesting. However, considering the clinical forms and the high number of diseased cats, I suggest carrying out laboratory investigations for feline panleukopenia virus which could be co-responsible for the high mortality rate and for a general immunodepression in cats.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[The previous posting had much clinical information on the situation of the cats, but very little regarding testing on the cats and there was no diagnostic testing mentioned. Consequently, we are left with being 'armchair' detectives to ascertain the disease potentially affecting these cats. Regardless of the cause of the illness/deaths in these cats, the entire situation is heart breaking for the animal and the caregivers. This large number of ill/deceased cats takes a tremendous toll on the emotions and energy of the caregivers.

Since we do not have a firm diagnosis, we will examine 2 disease possibilities.

Feline Panleukopenia
--------------------
Feline panleukopenia is a parvoviral infectious disease of kittens typically characterized by depression, anorexia, high fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and consequent severe dehydration. Adult cats are much less often affected. Diagnosis is usually based on clinical signs, severe neutropenia and lymphopenia, and fecal viral antigen or PCR testing. Treatment includes intensive fluid therapy, glucose and potassium supplementation, antimicrobial, anthelmintic, and antiemetic therapy, and sometimes immunotherapy.

Feline panleukopenia is a highly contagious, often fatal, viral disease of cats that is seen worldwide. Kittens are affected most severely. The causative parvovirus is very resistant; it can persist for 1 year at room temperature in the environment if protected in organic material. Feline panleukopenia is now diagnosed infrequently by veterinarians in many countries, presumably as a consequence of widespread vaccine use. However, infection rates remain high in some unvaccinated cat populations, and the disease occasionally is seen in vaccinated, pedigreed kittens that have been exposed to a high virus challenge. Feline panleukopenia has recently been recognized as a re-emergent disease in Australia. Large outbreaks have occurred in unvaccinated cats in shelters, and there has been a spread among pet cats in the wider community.

Etiology, Transmission, and Pathogenesis
-----------------------------------------
Feline parvovirus (FPV; synonymous with feline panleukopenia virus) is closely related to mink enteritis virus and the type 2 canine parvoviruses (CPV) that cause canine parvoviral enteritis. All are now designated as members of the species _Carnivore protoparvovirus 1_. FPV can cause disease in all felids and in some members of related families (e.g., raccoon, mink), but it does not harm canids. Conversely, some currently circulating CPV strains (CPV-2a, -2b, and -2c) have been shown to cause feline panleukopenia in domestic cats and larger felids. However, FPV dominates over CPV as the cause of feline panleukopenia worldwide. Vaccines that contain FPV protect cats against disease caused by CPV, although vaccines that contain FPV induce much lower antibody titers against CPV-2c than against FPV.

Virus particles are abundant in all secretions and excretions during the acute phase of illness and can be shed in the feces of survivors for as long as 6 weeks after recovery. Being highly resistant to inactivation, parvoviruses can be transported long distances via fomites (e.g., shoes, clothing). However, FPV can be destroyed by exposure to a 1:32 dilution of household bleach (6% aqueous sodium hypochlorite) for 10 minutes or more at room temperature. Peroxygen disinfectants (e.g., potassium peroxymonosulfate) are also highly effective. It is important that contaminated surfaces are thoroughly cleaned of organic material before disinfectants are applied.

Cats are infected oronasally by exposure to infected animals, their feces, secretions, or contaminated fomites. Most free-roaming cats are thought to be exposed to the virus during their 1st year of life. Those that develop subclinical infection or survive acute illness mount a robust, long-lasting, protective immune response.

FPV infects and destroys actively dividing cells in bone marrow, lymphoid tissues, intestinal epithelium, and -- in very young animals -- cerebellum and retina. In pregnant queens, the virus may spread transplacentally to cause embryonic resorption, fetal mummification, abortion, or stillbirth. Alternatively, infection of kittens in the perinatal period may destroy the germinal epithelium of the cerebellum, leading to cerebellar hypoplasia, incoordination, and tremor. FPV-induced cerebellar ataxia has become a relatively rare diagnosis, because most queens passively transfer sufficient antibodies to their kittens to protect them during the early period of susceptibility.

Clinical Findings
------------------
Most feline panleukopenia infections are subclinical, as evidenced by the high seroprevalence of anti-FPV antibodies among unvaccinated, healthy cats. Those cats that do become ill are usually less than 1 year old. Peracute cases may die suddenly with little or no warning (fading kittens). Acute cases show fever (104째-107째F [40째-41.7째C]), depression, and anorexia after an incubation period of 2-7 days. Vomiting usually develops 1-2 days after the onset of fever; it is typically bilious and unrelated to eating. Hypersalivation may be seen in some cases, associated with nausea or abdominal pain. Diarrhea may begin a little later than the vomiting but is not always present. In only 3%-15% of cases is the diarrhea hemorrhagic. Extreme dehydration develops rapidly. Affected cats may sit for hours at their water bowl, although they may not drink much. Terminal cases are hypothermic and may develop septic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Physical examination typically reveals profound depression, dehydration, and sometimes abdominal pain. Abdominal palpation -- which can induce immediate vomiting -- may reveal thickened intestinal loops and enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes. In cases of cerebellar hypoplasia, ataxia and tremors with normal mentation are seen. Retinal lesions, if present, appear as discrete gray foci.

The duration of this self-limiting illness is seldom > 5-7 days. Mortality is highest in kittens < 5 months old.

Lesions
-------
There are typically few gross lesions due to feline panleukopenia, although dehydration is usually marked. Bowel loops may be segmentally dilated and may have thickened, hyperemic walls. There may be petechiae or ecchymoses on the intestinal serosal surfaces. Perinatally infected kittens may have a noticeably small cerebellum. Histologically, the intestinal crypts are usually dilated and contain debris consisting of sloughed, necrotic, epithelial cells. Blunting and fusion of villi may be present. Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies are seen only occasionally in formalin-fixed specimens; use of Bouin's or Zenker's fixative will increase the likelihood of seeing these. There may be a notable lack of lymphocytic or inflammatory cell infiltration in the bowel walls because of destruction of these leukocytes by the virus.

Diagnosis
---------
- Typically based on clinical signs and leukopenia on a CBC

A presumptive diagnosis of feline panleukopenia is usually based on compatible clinical signs in an inadequately vaccinated cat and the presence of leukopenia (nadir 50-3000 WBC/mcL). Neutropenia develops earlier than lymphopenia. Total WBC counts < 2000 cells/mcL are associated with a poorer prognosis. During recovery from infection, there is typically a rebound neutrophilia with a marked left shift. Diagnosis can, in some cases, be confirmed using an in-office immunochromatographic test kit intended for detection of fecal CPV antigen. However, fecal antigen is detectable only for a short time after infection; false-negative results are common. The sensitivity of these tests has been reported to range from 50%-80%, but the specificity is much higher, 94%-100%.

Differential diagnoses include other causes of profound depression, leukopenia, and GI signs. Salmonellosis and infections with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus should be considered. Concurrent infection with FeLV and FPV can cause feline panleukopenia in adult cats. FPV infections combined with various salmonellae or feline calicivirus cause much more severe disease than FPV alone.

Treatment, Prevention, and Prognosis
------------------------------------
- Supportive care, prompt IV fluid treatment, and antibiotics are the primary treatments
- Effective vaccines are available

Successful treatment of acute cases of feline panleukopenia requires vigorous fluid therapy and supportive nursing care in the isolation unit. Electrolyte disturbances (e.g., hypokalemia), hypoglycemia, hypoproteinemia, anemia, and opportunistic secondary infections often develop in severely affected cats. Anticipation of these possibilities, close monitoring, and prompt intervention can improve outcome.

IV fluid replacement and maintenance with a balanced isotonic crystalloid solution (e.g., lactated Ringer's solution with calculated potassium supplementation) is the foundation of therapy. B vitamins should be added to the infusion, together with 5% glucose if hypoglycemia is suspected or proved. In addition to crystalloid infusion, transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma helps support plasma oncotic pressure and provides clotting factors to severely ill, hypoproteinemic kittens. It also provides some anti-FPV antibodies. Whole blood is preferable for the occasional cat that is severely anemic.

Parenteral, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy is indicated; however, nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides) must be avoided until dehydration has been fully corrected. For example, IV ampicillin (20 mg/kg, 3-4 times daily) could be given in combination with gentamicin (4 mg/kg, IV, once daily for no more than 7 days), starting once rehydration has been achieved. Because of the nephrotoxic potential of the gentamicin, urinary protein dipstick findings, sequential urine sediments, and serum SDMA or creatinine should be monitored. There are single antibiotic agents, albeit more expensive, that are effective against the anaerobes and gram-negative aerobes that are the most important bacteria in feline panleukopenia. These include 3rd-generation cephalosporins (e.g., ceftiofur, cefotaxime) and extended penicillins (e.g., piperacillin).

Intestinal parasitism commonly complicates feline panleukopenia, especially in shelter environments, so use of anthelmintics (e.g., fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg, PO, once daily for 5 days) is an important consideration and can be started once vomiting is controlled.

Antiemetic therapy (e.g., maropitant, ondansetron or metoclopramide) usually provides some relief and allows earlier enteral feeding of soft, easily digested food. Maropitant is the first-choice anti-emetic. In severely affected cats it can be combined with ondansetron. Feeding (little and often) should be commenced as early as possible, even in the face of mild, intermittent, persistent vomiting. Feeding promotes healing of the GI mucosa and re-establishment of an effective mucosal barrier. Cats with severe vomiting should not be fed until the vomiting is better controlled. Parenteral nutrition is indicated only for the most severely affected cases, and its use should not delay vigorous attempts to start enteral feeding.

Recombinant feline interferon omega (rFeIFN; 1 MU/kg, SC, once daily for 3 days) should be considered for use in the treatment of feline panleukopenia. Although rFeIFN is not approved by the FDA for this purpose and has not been proven effective in feline panleukopenia, it is approved and effective in the treatment of canine parvoviral enteritis. Passive immunotherapy using immune serum from solidly immune cats, or using a commercial product raised in horses, is widely practiced in some countries. There is limited evidence of treatment efficacy, however.

Excellent inactivated and modified-live virus vaccines that provide solid, long-lasting immunity are available for prevention of feline panleukopenia. Live vaccines should not be given to cats that are pregnant, immunosuppressed, or sick or to kittens < 4 weeks old. Most authorities recommend that kittens receive 2 or 3 modified-live vaccine doses SC, 3-4 weeks apart. The 1st vaccination is usually given at 6-9 weeks of age. The last dose of the initial vaccination series should not be administered before the kitten is 16 weeks old, to allow time for interfering maternal antibodies to wane so they do not inactivate the modified-live vaccine virus. A followup vaccine dose at 26-52 weeks is a new recommendation, because some kittens have residual interfering antibodies, even at 16 weeks, sufficient to prevent successful immunization. Exposure to virus should be avoided until 1 week after the initial vaccination series has been completed.

Adult cats should be revaccinated against FPV triennially or less frequently thereafter, although some manufacturers in some countries continue to recommend annual revaccination. Titer testing kits are commercially available to detect when individual cats are immune to feline panleukopenia. These can be used as an alternative to repeated, scheduled vaccinations, for clients who prefer that option.

Feline panleukopenia has a noticeably worse prognosis than CPV enteritis. Survival rates of 20%-51% have been reported in cats that received supportive treatment in-hospital for feline panleukopenia. By comparison, in one recent study, 90% of hospitalized puppies with CPV enteritis survived to discharge. It is not certain that the care routinely provided to cats with panleukopenia is equally as intense as that provided to dogs with CPV enteritis and that any difference would be reflected in these various reports. Studies have identified a variety of sometimes contradictory prognostic indicators in cats with feline panleukopenia. In one study, cats with hypothermia, lethargy, and low body weight at the time of admission fared worse.

Key Points
---------
- Feline panleukopenia is a highly contagious, often fatal, viral disease of cats.
- A majority of infections are subclinical. In cats that do become ill, clinical signs include high fever, profound depression, and anorexia. Many affected cats vomit, and some develop diarrhea. Only a minority have hemorrhagic diarrhea.
- Diagnosis is based on compatible clinical findings, including leukopenia, in an inadequately vaccinated kitten. Fecal antigen detection kits intended for diagnosis of CPV enteritis can also be used to diagnose feline panleukopenia. The sensitivity is moderate, and specificity is high.
- Treatment includes fluid, electrolyte, and glucose supplementation; antiemetic therapy; antibiotics; and anthelmintics.
- Excellent vaccines are available for prevention. They protect against both FPV and CPV.

Extracted from: https://www.msdvetmanual.com/generalized-conditions/feline-panleukopenia/feline-panleukopenia


Feline Infectious Peritonitis
-----------------------------
What is FIP?
------------
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a viral disease of cats caused by certain strains of a virus called the feline coronavirus. Most strains of feline coronavirus are found in the gastrointestinal tract and do not cause significant disease. These are referred to as feline enteric coronavirus (FeCV). Cats infected with FeCV usually do not show any symptoms during the initial viral infection, but may occasionally experience brief bouts of diarrhea and/or mild upper respiratory signs from which they recover spontaneously. FeCV-infected cats usually mount an immune response through which antibodies against the virus are produced within 7-10 days of infection. In approximately 10% of cats infected with FeCV, one or more mutations of the virus can alter its biological behavior, resulting in white blood cells becoming infected with virus and spreading it throughout the cat's body. When this occurs, the virus is referred to as the FIPV. An intense inflammatory reaction to FIPV occurs around vessels in the tissues where these infected cells locate, often in the abdomen, kidney, or brain. It is this interaction between the body's own immune system and the virus that is responsible for the development of FIP. Once a cat develops clinical FIP, the disease is usually progressive and almost always fatal without therapy that has recently become available, but that has yet to be approved to treat FIP in cats by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (see below). To our knowledge, coronaviruses cannot be passed from infected cats to humans.

Any cat that carries FeCV is potentially at risk for developing FIP, but younger cats are at greater risk of developing FIP, with approximately 70% of cases diagnosed in cats less than 1 1/2 years of age and 50% of cases occurring in cats less than 7 months of age. The most common mode of transmission of FeCV is believed to occur when infected queens pass along the virus to their kittens, usually when the kittens are between 5 and 8 weeks of age. Cats that are housed in high-density facilities (i.e. shelters, catteries) appear to be more susceptible to the development of FIP, as are pure bred cats, male cats, and geriatric cats, for reasons that remain unclear.

Cats that have been initially exposed to FeCV usually show no obvious symptoms. Some cats may show mild upper respiratory symptoms such as sneezing, watery eyes, and nasal discharge, while others may experience mild gastrointestinal signs such as diarrhea. In most cases, these mild signs are self-limiting. Only a small percentage of cats that are exposed to the FeCV develop FIP, and this can occur weeks, months, or even years after initial exposure to FeCV.

There are 2 major forms of FIP, an effusive, or "wet" form and a noneffusive, or "dry" form. Regardless of which form they ultimately progress to develop, cats infected with FIPV usually first develop nonspecific signs of disease such as loss of appetite, weight loss, depression, and fever. It is also important to note that cases of the effusive form of FIP can evolve into the non-effusive form and vice-versa.

Generally speaking, the signs of the noneffusive form, which may include the non-specific signs listed above as well as neurologic signs including seizures and ataxia (abnormal or uncoordinated movements) develop more slowly than those of the effusive form.

The signs of effusive form of FIP usually develop and progress relatively rapidly and include development of the above-mentioned non-specific signs combined with the accumulation of fluid in body cavities, including the abdomen and the thorax (chest cavity). Affected cats may develop a pot-bellied appearance due to fluid accumulation in the abdomen, and if the fluid accumulation is excessive, it may become difficult for a cat to breathe normally.

Unfortunately, there is currently no definitive test to diagnose FIP. While antibody levels, or titers, to coronavirus can be measured, they cannot definitively distinguish between exposure to FeCV and FIPV. A positive result means only that the cat has had a prior exposure to coronavirus, but not necessarily to FIPV. In spite of this limitation, however, young cats that experience a fever that is not responsive to antibiotics and that have high coronavirus titers are often presumptively diagnosed with FIP (appropriately in most cases). This is particularly true if characteristic fluid (yellow tinged with a high protein and white blood cell concentration) begins to accumulate within body cavities. A healthy cat with a high coronavirus titer (i.e. many antibodies against coronavirus), however, is not necessarily more likely to develop FIP or be a carrier of an FIPV than a cat with a low titer. In cats with suppressed immune systems, FIPV infections may not cause elevated coronavirus titers due to an inability of the immune system to produce sufficient antibodies against the virus.

Other available tests can, in theory, detect the presence of the virus itself. One of these tests, called the immunoperoxidase test, can detect viral proteins in virus-infected white blood cells in tissue, but a biopsy of affected tissue is necessary for evaluation. Another, called the immunofluorescence test, can detect viral proteins in virus-infected white blood cells in tissue or body fluids. More recently, a technology called polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been used to detect viral genetic material in tissue or body fluid. Although these tests can be useful, none of them is 100% accurate, and each suffers from its own limitations that may lead to false negative or false positive results.

Until recently, FIP was considered to be a non-treatable disease. While there are still some uncertainties regarding the long-term effectiveness of recently-identified antiviral drugs to treat FIP (most importantly regarding its effectiveness in treating the non-effusive form of FIP), studies in both the laboratory and in client-owned cats with naturally occurring FIP suggest that a drug currently referred to as GS-441524 may ultimately prove to be an effective treatment option for (minimally) the effusive form of FIP. While some cases of the non-effusive form of FIP responded to GS-441524 therapy in these trials, the responses in cases with this form of FIP were not as favorable as those seen in cases of the effusive form. This drug is currently not FDA-approved, however, and while there are a number of sources offering it for sale, anecdotal reports suggest that the products being provided by some of these sources vary widely in both accuracy of reported drug concentration and purity. It is very important to discuss the risks, benefits, and evolving acquisition and regulatory issues with your veterinarian if you are considering therapy with GS-441524. Supportive care, including fluid therapy, drainage of accumulated fluids, and blood transfusions, is also indicated in some cases.

The only way to definitively prevent FIP in cats is to prevent FeCV infection, which can be challenging given its ubiquitous nature. This is particularly true of cats that are housed in high density (shelters, catteries), and housing cats at a density at or below three per room is recommended to minimize stresses that can be associated with crowded living conditions. It is important to note that while FeCV is quite contagious (it is passed in the feces and saliva of infected cats and infects other cats primarily via the oral cavity), FIPV is not believed to be. Rather, FIP develops in individual cats after they are infected with FeCV and the virus undergoes mutations to become FIPV (FIPV itself is not passed in the feces). Keeping cats as healthy as possible, including preventing infection by other viruses such as feline leukemia virus and calicivirus by appropriate vaccination, where indicated, is likely to decrease the likelihood of FIP. Litter boxes should be kept clean and located away from food and water dishes. Some sources have suggested that newly acquired cats and any cats that are suspected of being infected with FeCV should be separated from other cats, although the usefulness of this management strategy is debatable.

There is only one licensed FIP vaccine available, but this vaccine has questionable effectiveness in preventing FIP, and it is not routinely recommended by the American Association of Feline Practitioners Feline Vaccine Advisory Panel. The vaccine appears to be safe, but the risks and benefits of vaccination should be weighed carefully. Cat owners should consult their veterinarian to help them decide if their cat should be vaccinated.

Extracted from: https://www.vet.cornell.edu/departments-centers-and-institutes/cornell-feline-health-center/health-information/feline-health-topics/feline-infectious-peritonitis - Mod.TG

ProMED map:
Istanbul, Turkey: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703817,4697]
See Also
Feline infectious peritonitis - Turkey: (IB) stray cat 20220605.8703682
2010
----
Feline infectious peritonitis - USA: (MI) 20100506.1470
1997
----
Feline infectious peritonitis vaccination 19970226.0446
Feline infectious peritonitis vaccination (04) 19970219.0407
Feline infectious peritonitis Vaccination (03) 19970211.0328
Feline infectious peritonitis vaccination (02) 19970210.0322
.................................................tg/may/lxl
</body>
