<header id=022921>
Published Date: 2013-01-17 12:10:27 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Influenza (08): (Norway) emergence of D222G variant & severity
Archive Number: 20130117.1503366
</header>
<body id=022921>
INFLUENZA (08): (NORWAY) EMERGENCE OF D222G VARIANT AND SEVERITY
****************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 17 Jan 2013
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 18, Issue 3 [summarised & edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20369


Title: Within-patient emergence of the influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 HA1 D222G variant and clear association with severe disease, Norway. By: Rykkvin R, Kilander A, Dudman SG, Hungnes O. At: Department of Virology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway

Summary
--------
The association between a particular mutation in the HA1 subunit of the influenza virus haemagglutinin, D222G, and severe and fatal disease in cases of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 in Norway during the 2009 pandemic was investigated using pyrosequencing. The prevalence of the variant among fatal cases was 8/26 and among severe non-fatal cases 5/52. No D222G mutations were found among the 381 mild cases. This difference could not be attributed to sampling differences, such as body location of sampling, or duration of illness. In cases with mutant virus where clinical specimens from different days of illness were available, transition from wild-type to mutant virus was commonly observed (4/5), indicating that the mutant virus emerged sporadically in individual patients. In patients with paired samples from both the upper and lower respiratory tract (n=8), the same viral genotypes were detected in both locations. In most of the D222G cases (11/13), the mutant virus was found as a quasi-species.

Introduction
----------
Infection with the pandemic influenza A(H1N1) virus that emerged in 2009 led to mild disease in the vast majority of cases; however, there was also an unusual occurrence of viral pneumonia, severe disease and death in younger age groups than commonly observed for seasonal influenza [1]. In a large proportion of severe cases, conditions predisposing for severe disease have been identified [2], and host factors, therefore, appear to strongly influence the clinical outcome of infection. On the other hand, this novel virus of zoonotic origin differed from the previous seasonal A(H1N1) virus in the resulting disease profile; thus, viral determinants of pathogenicity must also be involved, e.g. it has been shown to be more pneumotropic than seasonal A(H1N1) virus in a ferret model [3]. It is important to understand better what viral and host-related factors determine the observed dichotomous pathogenicity profile.

The 1st cases of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection in Norway were recorded in early May 2009, shortly after emergence in Mexico, but cases were few and scattered across the country until mid-summer [2009]. A limited influenza epidemic took place in late July/early August 2009, followed by a comparatively calm period leading up to a major epidemic that surpassed all previous peaks recorded in the current surveillance system. The epidemic reached its highest point in early November 2009, and by the end of 2009, it had mostly subsided.

As part of the intensified surveillance carried out during the 2009 influenza pandemic, the national reference laboratory for human influenza at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health received a large number of respiratory specimens from confirmed and possible cases of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09. In late November 2009, we noticed that a particular amino acid substitution -- aspartic acid (D) to glycine (G) in the viral haemagglutinin (HA) glycoprotein subunit HA1 at position 222 (D222G) -- appeared in fatal cases, while we did not find it in the numerous mild cases analysed. Realising that a similar pattern seemed to be taking place in the Ukraine (R. Daniels, personal communication, November 2009) and given that the mutation had been shown to influence viral receptor specificity in another influenza A(H1N1) virus [4], it was decided to notify international public health authorities and other national authorities about this possible pathogenicity determinant to expedite assessment of it [5]. A preliminary review in January 2010 of D222G amino acid substitution in the HA of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses from the World Health Organization (WHO) stated that mutations, including those leading to the D222G substitution in the HA, had appeared sporadically since the 1st emergence of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses and that the substitutions in HA had been reported in viruses obtained from cases of mild to severe to fatal illnesses but that such viruses had neither formed distinct phylogenetic clustering nor been associated with consistent changes in virus antigenicity [6].

Since the 1st account of our findings in Norway [7], investigations into the occurrence of this mutation resulted in an increasing number of reports [8-28]. While the prevalence of this mutation varied between the reporting countries, in most studies, the 222G mutation is primarily found in severe and fatal cases. One of the 1st larger studies came from a group in Hong Kong, who analysed this amino acid position in severe and non-severe cases of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 [13]. Nine (4.1 percent) of 219 severe or fatal cases of pandemic influenza had the mutation in contrast to none of 239 non-severe cases.

Data from these reports indicated that the D222G mutation was absent or uncommon in viruses that were in sustained circulation. However, one case of transmission of a 222G virus was reported [9], but the transmitted virus in this case had acquired an additional mutation that may have influenced receptor binding characteristics.

To further investigate the sporadic occurrence of the 222G mutant influenza virus, we performed a more in-depth analysis of an expanded data set. Our original data set [7] included 266 cases, while the expanded set comprised 462 cases. The present study included assessment of the majority of the fatal cases in Norway as well as of a larger number of samples from severe non-fatal and mild cases collected throughout the pandemic.

We studied the prevalence of HA1 222 mutations within different clinical outcome groups, in serially collected specimens, in upper versus lower respiratory tract and in early versus late specimens. We also analysed age and sex distribution and examined the characteristics of the fatal cases.

We further compared the mutant viruses phylogenetically and looked for the presence of mutant quasi-species and oseltamivir resistance.

[Interested readers should access the original document via the source URL to view the full text describing the methods, figures, the tabulated data, and references.]

Discussion
---------
In the present study, we provide further epidemiological evidence of the association between the D222G mutation in HA1 of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus and severe or fatal clinical course. Furthermore, we present evidence that the mutated viruses emerge in individual patients after the onset of illness and demonstrate the presence of mutant virus in both the upper and lower respiratory tract. We also address some potential biases that could conceivably confound the analysis. The Norwegian cases of infection with HA1 222G genotype viruses have occurred sporadically and do not cluster epidemiologically or in phylogenetic analysis.

As observed by others, the D222G substitution has been observed to occur sporadically in the laboratory when specimens containing predominantly wild-type virus are subjected to virus isolation in eggs or mammalian cell lines [6,13,35].We therefore based our analysis on viral sequences obtained from the primary clinical specimens.

The 222G viruses appear to be rare among circulating strains, but are still quite frequent in patients with severe disease, who are not epidemiologically linked. A likely explanation is that the presence of mutant viruses in these particular individuals experiencing severe disease is due to selective upgrowth of mutant genomes during infection. In all 4 222G cases where we could analyse both early and late specimens, we observed a transition from wild-type to mutant virus, which lends support to the hypothesis that the presence of the mutant is due to sporadic emergence rather than widespread circulation.

In our analysis, we could not distinguish between upgrowth from a rare quasi-species, which may be present at inapparent levels in many more cases, and upgrowth from de novo mutation events. The 222G genotype appears to occur as sporadic mutations with no or little onward transmission, rather than through persistence as a circulating variant. If this is the case, the likelihood of finding mutant viruses is expected to increase during the course of infection. Conceivably, since the severe cases, including those that were fatal, tended to be sampled later in their course of illness than mild cases, the higher occurrence of mutations could alternatively be explained purely as a sampling artifact and not as a marker of virulence. But if the occurrence of the mutation was merely a function of time since infection, there should be no difference in the frequency of 222G mutant in specimens from mild versus severe cases, if taken equally late in infection. Our results show that the significant difference remained even when all early specimens were excluded: thus the difference in sampling day can be ruled out as an alternative explanation for the pattern observed.

In several of the cases, simultaneous specimens were available from different body locations. In all of these pairs/sets, the same genotypes were observed, but with differences in the ratio of mutant versus wild type in patients harbouring quasi-species. Other studies have identified D222G quasi-species mainly in endotracheal aspirate or broncheoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples and less frequently in nasopharyngeal aspirate samples [12,14,20]. This discrepancy could be due to the use of different analytical methods. Lower rates of mutant versus wild type in nasal swabs may not have been revealed by conventional sequencing. This was demonstrated by Baldanti et al [14]. In D222G/N cases with available paired nasal swabs and BAL samples, the authors found D222G/N in only one of 4 cases using direct sequencing, but this proportion increased to 3 of 4 cases using clonal analysis. From our study, we cannot exclude the possibility that the occurrence of the mutation as a quasi-species, together with the wild-type, is due to a complementary function of the wild-type. This phenomenon might change if the mutant virus were to develop another fitness-compensatory mutation that permits the mutant to replicate and spread in pure form. This possibility needs to be further studied.

In addition to its possible biological importance, the fact that the majority of the cases with 222G mutants carried a mixture of 222D- and 222G-encoding viral genomes, usually with predominance of the wild-type 222D, makes it likely that many influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 cases worldwide carrying D222G mutant viruses could have been missed in analyses that are not sensitive to minor nucleic acid species or where only the majority nucleotide is recorded in the published sequence.

Selleri et al analysed influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viral quasi-species and the polymorphism at codon 222 by ultra-deep pyrosequencing [28]. Codon 222 polymorphism was detected in 40.7 percent of patients by ultra-deep pyrosequencing and in only 7.1 percent by conventional sequencing. They found that the frequency of polymorphism was significantly higher in samples collected from patients with severe manifestations than in those patients with moderate-mild manifestations. The D222G/N/A mutations were detected as either minor or predominant variants only in severe cases, whereas D222E was equally represented in severe and moderate-mild infections.

The question of whether the presence of mutant viruses in lower airways is underestimated due to lack of sampling in the lower respiratory tract was investigated by Baldanti et al [14]. Paired nasal swabs and BAL samples from patients admitted to intensive care units for mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation were compared with samples from patients with pneumonia not requiring mechanical ventilation and from community patients. By combining data from nasal swabs and BAL samples, the frequency of D222G/N mutants in patients with severe infections increased to 43 percent, as compared with 7.8 percent and 0 percent in patients with moderate and mild infections, respectively [14]. Baldanti et al also showed that the viral RNA levels were significantly higher in BAL samples than those in nasal swabs [14]. Piralla et al. described the same finding, suggesting higher virus replication in the lower respiratory tract [20].

Watanabe et al. have characterised 2 of the Norwegian virus isolates included in our study, namely A/Norway/3568/2009 (Norway3568) and A/Norway/3487-2/2009 (Norway3487) [34]. The viruses were isolates from a fatal case (Norway3487) and a mild case (Norway3568): the viruses differ by only 10 amino acids, and none of the amino acid changes known to affect virulence were found in PB2, PB1-F2, HA, or NS1, except for an amino acid change to 222G in HA1, in Norway3487. More efficient viral replication in cultured cells and delayed virus clearance from ferret respiratory organs was observed for Norway3487 virus (isolated from a severe case), as compared with Norway3568 (isolated from a mild case). To some extent, Norway3487 virus caused more severe lung damage in non-human primates than did Norway3568 virus. Moreover, the authors found that PB2 derived from Norway3487 contributed to higher polymerase activity, possibly leading to more efficient viral replication in vitro and in vivo, which in turn also could play a role in the increased lung damage.

In our analysis, all cases with detectable 222G mutant viruses had severe illness, and the prevalence of 222G increased with the degree of severe outcome. If the conditions for virus growth in lower airways are favourable to 222G mutants and the likelihood of upgrowth of mutant virus increases with duration of infection, it follows that individuals who fail to limit infection to upper airways and fail to eliminate the infection rapidly stand a greater risk of acquiring mutant viruses. Regardless of virulence, such a mechanism may contribute to the observed pattern of mutants being found primarily in severe cases. However, if the mutant viruses are also more virulent, an increased probability of emergence in patients who already have a long-lasting infection involving the lower respiratory tract probably constitutes a vicious circle phenomenon, which underscores the importance of treatment that helps persons with elevated risk to clear the infection rapidly.

The concept of D222G being a determinant of virulence is supported by a growing body of evidence from in vitro and animal studies including non-human primates [36-45]. Increased tropism of D222G mutant virus for type II pneumocytes [44] may result in more efficient infection, reducing the availability of progenitor cells for essential lung functions and regeneration and thus leading to severe pulmonary impairment. Increased viral titres in the lungs also trigger stronger inflammatory responses, augmenting tissue damage and delaying healing in the infected lungs [44].

While one instance of transmission of 222G mutant virus has been documented [9], the transmitted virus in this case had acquired an additional mutation, (G155E) that may have counteracted the putative 222G-induced receptor-binding changes [46], and there are no indications that effective sustained transmission has taken place. In our data set, one of the patients with mutant viruses was the likely source of infection of a healthcare worker. However, this occurred early in the course of illness: virus from an early specimen, as well as the virus collected from the healthcare worker, was wild type.

In light of the fact that 222G mutant viruses are and remain substantially less transmissible than corresponding wild-type viruses, their immediate public health impact is limited to the individual cases in whom such mutants occur and the fact that they may possibly contribute to the severity of illness. Similar to the apparent situation with avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection in humans, tropism of 222G mutant viruses for lung cells may contribute to both increased virulence and impaired transmissibility, which may thus be linked traits [47]. On the other hand, when the H275Y neuraminidase mutation conferring oseltamivir resistance in seasonal influenza A(H1N1) viruses was 1st identified, this mutation also correlated with impaired viral fitness [48], a situation that was abruptly changed with the global emergence of high-fitness resistant viruses during the 2007/08 influenza season [49]. Similarly, further adaptation of the newly emerged A(H1N1)pdm09 virus to humans as host species may conceivably lead to compensatory mutations that render the 222G mutants more transmissible, or lead to other changes that influence pathogenicity. The evolution of these viruses, therefore, needs to be closely monitored in a framework that ensures that virological and clinical data are taken into account.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This study shows that 222G viruses appear to be rare among circulating strains but are still quite frequent in patients with severe disease who are not epidemiologically linked. A likely explanation is that the presence of mutant viruses in these particular individuals experiencing severe disease is due to selective upgrowth of mutant genomes during infection. In all 4 222G cases where the authors could analyse both early and late specimens, they observed a transition from wild-type to mutant virus, which lends support to the hypothesis that the presence of the mutant is due to sporadic emergence rather than widespread circulation. However, the observations that 222G mutant viruses are and remain substantially less transmissible than corresponding wild-type viruses suggest that their immediate public health impact is limited to the individual cases in whom such mutants occur. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1FEs.]
See Also
2010
----
Influenza (10): D222G & severity 20101026.3881
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) (31): UK (Scotland) D222G mut'n 20100422.1310
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) (28): Hong Kong SAR, Norway, D222G mutation 20100409.1147
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) (21): Norway, D222G mutation 20100305.0729
.................................................cp/msp/dk
</body>
