<header id=033593>
Published Date: 2015-10-19 11:51:50 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Q fever - Australia (02): (VI)
Archive Number: 20151019.3726962
</header>
<body id=033593>
Q FEVER - AUSTRALIA (02): (VICTORIA)
************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sun 18 Oct 2015
Source: Australian Broadcasting Corporation [edited]
http://www.abc.net.au/landline/content/2015/s4333689.htm


PIP COURTNEY, PRESENTER: But 1st to our exclusive story on Australia's largest-ever farm-based outbreak of Q fever. You might remember our investigative report back in July 2015 on the disease, which is passed from animals to humans and is under-reported. Landline can now reveal at least 24 people have contracted Q fever during an ongoing outbreak on a Victorian goat dairy farm. While the farm owners and health authorities seem to have stemmed the flow of people falling ill, they have not been able to stop the spread of the disease among the animals. Prue Adams reports.

PRUE ADAMS, REPORTER: There's a picture-perfect quality to this farmland near Ballarat. Lambs at foot, bluestone buildings and at this time of year, golden canola. It's a region that also boasts one of the biggest dairy goat farms in the country. The only clue to an underlying problem here are the warnings on the front gate.

SANDY CAMERON, GOAT FARM OWNER: The 1st thing is we've had to restrict access to the property, signs up saying "Don't Enter". Of course, being in the country, people are fairly used to ignoring signs, so then we - you've actually got to try and enforce that.

PRUE ADAMS: Sandy Cameron is the 3rd generation on this land. In 1992, he and his wife Julie decided to branch out into milking sheep.

(Landline, 1992): The Camerons' milking flock is the United Nations of sheep. The best milkers from a range of breeds and crosses make up the group.

(Present) When Landline caught up with the Camerons in 1997, they were only producing sheep milk and cheese. Later that year, they got into goats. And now, in addition to milking thousands of sheep, they also milk 5000 goats twice daily. This is a big enterprise with 3 dairies and employing 100 staff. 4 years ago, some of those employees started getting sick.

SANDY CAMERON: In 2011, we had a few people get Q fever, including our daughter, but we didn't know it was Q fever. Even though they went to doctors, we didn't know what was going on. It was late 2012 before 1 of the staff had it diagnosed as Q fever. In hindsight we realized it was during 2012 was the main incidence of staff being infected.

SIMON FIRESTONE, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE: It was sounding very significant from the start. So historically in Victoria, the Health Department receives notifications of about 30 cases of Q fever a year, and in 1 week, they'd 5 notified associated with the 1 farm property. So, yeah, that was an outbreak. That was clearly an outbreak smacking us in the face.

PRUE ADAMS: In 2013, Dr Simon Firestone, a senior veterinary lecturer at Melbourne University, was among several authorities notified.

SIMON FIRESTONE: It's the largest farm-associated outbreak in Australia's history. So we've had large abattoir-associated outbreaks and a large single outbreak where there were 25 cases previously at a saleyard in South Australia in 2004. But, yeah, at 24 cases, this is the largest by far of any of the single farm-associated outbreaks and then, as with all of these, there would be cases that have gone undiagnosed.

PRUE ADAMS: Q fever is a zoonotic disease, spread from animals to humans. Shearers, people who work with beef cattle and other livestock, have traditionally been seen as at risk, although it's now believed all animals can be carriers. The _Coxiella burnetii_ bacterium that causes Q fever is held in the placenta, so the greatest risk is at birthing. But the organism can also sit in the soil for years and on dry dusty days become airborne. Some people who inhale it aren't even aware they've contracted Q fever. For others, like Mick Hudson, it's serious. The sheep meat producer came down with a crippling headache and chills after rounding up wild goats in Outback New South Wales.

Q FEVER PATIENT #1: Went in to the doctor and he took 1 look at me, I told him that I was sweating and he just said, "Mate, you've got goat fever. Straight up to the hospital with you." I would've been happy to die when I had it and I was laying in hospital, like, I was that sick, I couldn't have cared if I'd died.

PRUE ADAMS: Between 15 and 20 percent of sufferers have long-term complaints, including head and muscle aches and chronic tiredness.

Q FEVER PATIENT #1: But certainly the - Q fever certainly affected me. Yeah, like - and those energy levels were pretty low for a long time after I come out of hospital, you know. I was back shearing, but I was hurting, yeah. Just driving meself to work, you know? Yeah.

Q FEVER PATIENT #2: How long was I sick? Um, a very long time. Because after the initial disease process, I then developed the chronic fatigue Q fever syndrome.

PRUE ADAMS: Renowned horsewoman Barbara Willoughby became critically ill after delivering a stillborn calf. She's never fully recovered and after featuring in the Landline story in July, has set up a Facebook page for other Q fever victims. Along with industry body Livestock SA, some sufferers are pushing for another federally funded vaccination campaign like that rolled out in 2002.

Q FEVER PATIENT #2: It's a long time since the program has stopped and there's a whole generation of children, of young people now going out into the workforce that are exposed to the virus.

PRUE ADAMS: While Q fever is found across the world, Australia has the only human vaccine. It's a 2-part process that involves taking a blood sample and doing a scratch test to make sure there are no antibodies present. If those results come back negative, a week later, the vaccine can be administered. Vaccinations were rolled out on the affected Victorian goat farm from 2013, costing the business around AUD 20 000 [USD 14 518] a year.

SANDY CAMERON: Anyone who even comes for a job trial, we vaccinate. All external contractors, all staff obviously, partners of staff, we offer it to neighbours. We have an HR manager. I'd say about half her time for the last couple of years would've been dominated by enforcing that, which is not easy.

PRUE ADAMS: Sandy Cameron says 1 of the issues in tackling Q fever is that it's only notifiable as a human health issue. The disease in infected animals is rarely addressed. So what were the 1st signs of Q fever in the goats?

SANDY CAMERON: The main sign we see is abortion, late-term abortion in the goats and now that we know what it is and we recognise that we do have substantially more abortions in goats than what we used to, so around 5-10 per cent of 1st-lactation goats abort.

PRUE ADAMS: And other than abortions, are there any other telltale signs of Q fever in stock?

SANDY CAMERON: Well, we suspect that they're depressed at the time, which you would imagine they would be, but goats are pretty stoic animals. They either look healthy or they're very sick, so we don't really know.

PRUE ADAMS: And do you know where the initial cases of Q fever in the animals came from?

SANDY CAMERON: It's certainly endemic in the district. We actually tested staff in 2009, including myself and my father. We'd had old infections, my brother had an old infection. Lots of shearers, etc. in the district have been infected over the years. So it's obviously endemic in the district and I imagine we built up quite a large pool of goats that had never seen it. It got in there, whether from kangaroos - there's lots of kangaroos here - or from the sheep and that would have exploded, hitting a big population of susceptible animals.

SIMON FIRESTONE: It's fairly endemic on that farm now. We've seen rates of infection, sort of 30, 40 per cent amongst goats within - after a couple of years of life. So it's not something you're gonna get rid of very quickly.

PRUE ADAMS: While the infection among the goats is ongoing, there have been no new human cases in at least a year. That's been put down to the vaccination campaign and a range of other preventative measures. Potentially contaminated bedding and birthing straw is later dug into the ground and work clothes have to be left on site. An employee's spouse was thought to have contracted Q fever from washing her husband's infected clothing. The saving grace for this farm is its isolated location, at least 10 kilometres from the closest town and it's a small town at that. We only have to look across the globe at an eerily similar dairy goat outbreak to see what can happen in more densely populated areas. In the Netherlands from 2007 until 2010, Q fever got a foothold on a series of farms.

WIM VAN DER HOEK, PUBLIC HEALTH INSTITUTE, NETHERLANDS: It took the Netherlands by surprise and it was also a shock, yeah. No doubt about it.

PRUE ADAMS: With as many as 50 000 people getting sick, the Dutch Government ordered the destruction of tens of thousands of pregnant goats.

WIM VAN DER HOEK: So it was definitely a very difficult period, of course, for those farmers. They were compensated for the animals that were culled, but of course that could not compensate the entire losses that they faced.

PRUE ADAMS: Difficult question: in the Netherlands they culled a lot of the animals. Was it ever considered that these goats should be culled?

SIMON FIRESTONE: Yeah, look, it's most definitely been considered and it's been proposed by some people that have been involved with the outbreak. But it would absolutely be the last resort in this case. Yeah, we've been trying to do everything we could to avoid that as an option.

SANDY CAMERON: We're grateful to especially the Victorian Health Department that they haven't taken that easy option which is available to them to demand we slaughter all our goats.

PRUE ADAMS: What would that do to the business?

SANDY CAMERON: Obviously I'd be looking for a job, along with everyone else.

PRUE ADAMS: Dutch farmers had a tool that Australian farmers don't: access to an animal vaccine produced by the French company Ceva. It meant goats there could be immunised, which eventually stopped the Q fever spread. Why not import the French-made animal vaccine?

SIMON FIRESTONE: Yeah, we tried that. That was 1 of our 1st angles of attack. Unfortunately, that importation process was rejected by Canberra. We went through the appropriate channels, but they saw a biosecurity risk with that product. So that perplexed the Europeans a little bit because they've used it with no obvious issues throughout large parts of Europe.

SANDY CAMERON: Frustrated in a sense, but Australia's got a big agricultural industry. I can understand if it's not safe, then it shouldn't come in. Ceva is a multinational company. They were frustrated. They said, "This is nonsense."

PRUE ADAMS: When doctors take blood from patients to check for Q fever, most of those samples end up here at the Rickettsial Reference Laboratory in Geelong. This small unit tests at least 20 suspected cases a day. Headed up by Dr John Stenos, the laboratory is in the process of making a vaccine that can be used to inoculate the local infected goat herd.

JOHN STENOS, AUST. RICKETTSIAL REFERENCE LAB.: The way the vaccine's produced is we've gone out onto the farm and got contaminated material which we've then been able to isolate the _Coxiella burnetii_ from. Now this is then amplified in these eggs and then returned to the same farm for the immunisation process or the vaccination process. Now, to broaden that just requires the regulator to agree to its use.

PRUE ADAMS: Trials start in the Camerons' kids in the next few weeks, but there are substantial regulatory hurdles to jump before the vaccine will be available for widespread use on the farm, let alone further afield. And, amazingly, Sandy Cameron is funding, to the tune of around AUD 1 million [USD 725 900], the development and eventual production of the animal vaccine.

SANDY CAMERON: We've travelled a bit with the business and I can't think of another country in the world where it would be left to an individual farm to develop a vaccine aimed at protecting a human population.

PRUE ADAMS: So have you not had any help from, say, the Federal Government authorities in terms ... ?

SANDY CAMERON: No.

PRUE ADAMS: No, none at all ...

SANDY CAMERON: None at all.

PRUE ADAMS: ... in terms of getting that vaccine across the line?

SANDY CAMERON: No.

PRUE ADAMS: So they've basically said to you, "No, you can't bring it in from Europe, but you're on your own"?

SANDY CAMERON: That's right, yes.

PRUE ADAMS: We've opted not to name the dairy in question out of concern for their business. They produce around 13 000 litres of sheep and goat milk a day and make yoghurt and cheese. Their milk is pasteurised and authorities insist you can't catch Q fever from pasteurised products. I've checked with the Dutch authorities too, and despite them enduring the world's worst outbreak of Q fever, no one contracted the disease from properly treated milk or cheese. Still, Sandy and Julie Cameron are understandably concerned about speaking out.

SANDY CAMERON: I'm a big believer in openness. I'm a vet, and as I say, a bit of a scientist. I think the more people know about things, the better. But there's always that just little nagging thing that we borrowed a lot of money to get this business on the ground and I'd hate some sort of fear campaign based not on fact to damage our market. So, yes, there's always nervousness.

PRUE ADAMS: Dr Simon Firestone is nervous too because he sees the Victorian outbreak as a warning sign.

SIMON FIRESTONE: The farm at the centre of this outbreak really follows a European style of farming, so very intense animal densities, very high output and very high inputs, but - which is not typical of this sort of Australian pasture-based extensive farming system. But there is a very strong drive towards more farming ventures that follow that style of farming and some of that drive is coming from the international market in goat dairy products and we're seeing new ventures that are popping up. As the industry emerges, so do the risks and we need to keep up with that.

SANDY CAMERON: The warning's there. If there is a big problem with Q fever, now no one can say they didn't know about it - partly from our experience, your recent reports on it, etc. The awareness is there, but there's no action.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[_Coxiella burnetii_, the causative agent, was discovered in 1937. This organism is an agent that can be resistant to heat and desiccation and is highly infectious by the aerosol route. A single inhaled organism may produce clinical illness. Indeed, in [non-human] primates, the dose to kill 50 percent of the primates was found to be
1.7 organisms (1).

Cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reservoirs of _C. burnetii_. Infection has been noted in a wide variety of other animals, including other species of livestock and in domesticated pets. _C. burnetii_ does not usually cause clinical disease in these animals, although abortion in goats and sheep has been linked to _C. burnetii_ infection. Organisms are excreted in milk, urine, and feces of infected animals. Most importantly, during birthing the organisms are shed in high numbers within the amniotic fluids and the placenta. Contact with contaminated wool is known to be a mode of transmission (2).

The organisms can be resistant to heat, drying, and many common disinfectants. These features enable the bacteria to survive for long periods in the environment. This very stable form of _C. burnetii_ is associated with compact small-cell variants of the organism that are produced during standard replication along with the less resistant large-cell form, metabolically dormant, and spore-like (3).

Infection of humans usually occurs by inhalation of these organisms from air that contains airborne barnyard dust contaminated by dried placental material, birth fluids, and excreta of infected herd animals. Humans are often very susceptible to the disease, and very few organisms may be required to cause infection.

Ingestion of contaminated milk, followed by regurgitation and inspiration of the contaminated food, is a less common mode of transmission. Other modes of transmission to humans, including tick bites and human-to-human transmission, are rare.

References
------
1. Lille RD, Perrin TL, Armstrong C: An institutional outbreak of pneumonitis. III. Histopathology in man and rhesus monkeys in the pneumonitis due to the virus of "Q fever." Pub Hlth Rep 1941; 56: 1419-25

2. Maurin M, Raoult D. Q fever: Clin Microbiol Rev 1999; 12: 518-53 (abstract available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10515901)

3. Norlander L: Q fever epidemiology and pathogenesis. Microbes Infect 2000; 2: 417-24 (abstract available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10817644) - Mod.LL

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3726962,288.]
See Also
Q fever - USA, Canada: ex Germany (RP) sheep cell therapy, 2014 20151002.3684869
Q fever - Australia: (NS) 20150717.3516801
2011
----
Q fever - Australia (05): (QL) 20111125.3447
Q fever - Australia (04): (QL) 20111124.3434
Q fever - Australia (03): duration of vaccine protection 20110404.1047
Q fever - Australia (02): background 20110403.1029
Q fever - Australia: (NS) 20110401.1005
2009
----
Q fever - Australia: (SA), laboratory-acquired 20091225.4345
2007
----
Q fever - Australia (SA) (04) 20070731.2458
Q fever - Australia (SA)(03): fatality 20070730.2449
Q fever - Australia (SA) (02): abattoir 20070713.2244
Q fever - Australia (SA) 20070624.2038
2005
----
Q fever, calving - Australia (NSW) 20051103.3222
2004
----
Q fever, farmers - Australia (S. Australia) 20041214.3309
2001
----
Q fever - Australia: background (02) 20010202.0224
Q fever - Australia: background 20010131.0213
Q fever - Australia (Queensland) 20010129.0204
.................................................sb/ll/pg/dk
</body>
