<header id=037370>
Published Date: 2014-10-08 18:04:57 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Anthrax: new ecological research (04)
Archive Number: 20141008.2843903
</header>
<body id=037370>
ANTHRAX: NEW ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH (04)
*************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 1 Oct 2014
Source: Proceedings of the Royal Society [edited]
http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/281/1795/20141785.full.pdf+html


Turner WC et al . 2014 Fatal attraction: vegetation responses to nutrient inputs attract herbivores to infectious anthrax carcass sites. Proc. R. Soc. B 281: 20141785; http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1785.

Abstract:
Parasites can shape the foraging behaviour of their hosts through cues indicating risk of infection. When cues for risk co-occur with desired traits such as forage quality, individuals face a trade-off between nutrient acquisition and parasite exposure. We evaluated how this trade-off may influence disease transmission in a 3-year experimental study of anthrax in a guild of mammalian herbivores in Etosha National Park, Namibia. At plains zebra (_Equus quagga_) carcass sites, we assessed (i) carcass nutrient effects on soils and grasses, (ii) concentrations of _Bacillus anthracis_ (BA) on grasses and in soils, and (iii) herbivore grazing behaviour, compared with control sites, using motion-sensing camera traps. We found that carcass-mediated nutrient pulses improved soil and vegetation, and that BA is found on grasses up to 2 years after death. Host foraging responses to carcass sites shifted from avoidance to attraction, and ultimately to no preference, with the strength and duration of these behavioural responses varying among herbivore species. Our results demonstrate that animal carcasses alter the environment and attract grazing hosts to parasite aggregations. This attraction may enhance transmission rates, suggesting that hosts are limited in their ability to trade off nutrient intake with parasite avoidance when relying on indirect cues.

Discussion
The aims of our study were to determine (i) whether herbivores could be exposed to BA when grazing at anthrax carcass sites, (ii) whether herbivores preferentially feed at or avoid anthrax carcass sites, (iii) the duration of processes identified under (i) and (ii), and (iv) the potential importance of carcass sites for foraging-based disease transmission in grazing herbivores. We found that nutrients from carcasses positively alter the environment in ways that are attractive to some, but not all herbivore species, and that anthrax carcass sites represent a significant risk of exposure to BA for grazing herbivores. The time scales of peak site infectivity and attractiveness coincide in the first year after death--evidence that selective foraging may be particularly important in sustaining BA transmission in endemic anthrax areas. When host foraging responses to parasite-associated cues vary with time, the success of the avoidance period in reducing or preventing infection depends upon the lifespan of the parasite in the environment. Here we describe an infection-avoidance mismatch for herbivores foraging at anthrax carcass sites, but this has also been observed for other parasite-associated cues. For example, herbivores most strongly avoid foraging near fresh faeces, but it can take weeks before nematode eggs in faeces develop into infectious larvae and migrate onto surrounding vegetation. Therefore, if hosts rely on indirect cues to assess temporal changes in parasite risk, trading off parasite avoidance with food acquisition in high-parasite/ high-quality foraging locations may be an imperfect strategy. Animal carcasses represent a significant and localized pulse of nutrients into the environment, which can lead to increased herbivory on plants fertilized by carcasses (e.g. cicada carcasses). Previous studies of ungulate carcass effects on soil and vegetation have been conducted only in temperate or arctic environments, and Towne suggested that abundant scavenger communities would reduce the nutrient effect of carcasses in tropical systems. In our subtropical system, however, we found that carcasses created clear and biologically significant effects on soil P, N and pH for at least 3 years post-mortem, with shorter-term effects on soil Na, K, grass biomass and grass N, despite very swift consumption of soft tissue by scavengers. After body fluids have entered the environment, scavenger removal of the carcass remains may actually enhance the chances of subsequent herbivory, because the presence of skin and bones on the site might provide a visual cue that deters herbivory, or at least prevent vegetation re-growth beneath the remains.

Experimental lethal doses for ingested anthrax are high in herbivores (around 10**7-10**8 spores [20]), therefore transmission depends on BA aggregating in the environment and the behaviour of potential hosts at these aggregations. BA spores are known to be concentrated in soils at anthrax carcass sites and can persist there for several years, patterns that are not affected by scavenger presence or exclusion. Despite the hypothesized importance of grazing in BA transmission, this is the 1st study to examine levels of BA contamination on grasses in the natural environment. We found that the above-ground component of grass holds BA spores, and one year after death, the concentrations on grasses were as high as in soil. However, although spore concentrations remained high in soil and on grass roots over the 3 years of study, by the 2nd year after death, concentrations on grasses above ground were significantly lower, and by the 3rd year, they were near zero. This indicates that herbivores can be exposed to relatively high concentrations of BA from grazing at carcass sites in the 1st year, when nutrient-rich vegetation has regenerated. If herbivores consume grass roots as well as above-ground components when grazing, they can also be exposed to high BA spore concentrations throughout the 2nd year. This opens the door to species-specific and seasonal differences in exposure risk to BA based on variation in foraging ecology.

The camera trap study provides further support that transmission of BA is foraging-based and species-specific. Forage selection is hierarchical, from large-scale seasonal movements through daily movements for water, forage, rest and predator avoidance, down to step-by-step decisions about potential food items within sensory range. Our results suggest that the forage selection processes that cause over representation of grazing in infectious patches take place on the very fine scale of step-by-step decisions. There were signs of early avoidance of carcass nutrient patches after death, the length of which is likely to depend upon when the 1st rainfall (and thus plant regrowth) occurs relative to the time of death. However, should an herbivore encounter a recently created carcass patch, it is still more likely to graze there than at a nearby grassland patch, a pattern that was particularly strong for zebra. From around 10 months onwards, herbivores were as likely to visit carcass patches as control patches yet were still more likely to graze when visiting carcass patches. After approximately 2 years, attraction to the carcass patches disappeared, and the patch types seem indistinguishable to grazers. Attraction strength varied among species, with zebra, springbok and wildebeest showing periodically strong preferences for grazing at anthrax carcass patches (up to 4 times the frequency of grazing events in carcass patches relative to control patches in the 1st year). Similarly, we did not detect any significant preference for carcass patches by gemsbok, which, compared with the other herbivore species examined, are rarely found as anthrax mortalities. In future research, we will evaluate transmission probabilities, and the timing and intensity of anthrax outbreaks among herbivore species.

Southern Africa has the greatest genetic diversity of BA and is hypothesized to be its geographical origin. Therefore, the environmental conditions in our study area may represent the environment in which the bacterium evolved much of its current life history. A recent experiment demonstrates that BA spores in soil enhance grass seedling establishment, and that even small additions of blood increase grass height. This may indicate a BA-grass mutualism whereby BA benefits from a quick regeneration of nutrient-rich grasses at carcass sites to attract herbivorous hosts. Although not evaluated in this study, exsanguination from anthrax carcasses could lead to a greater localized nutrient release than from non-anthrax carcasses, where blood coagulates in tissues that are subsequently consumed and dispersed by scavengers. From an evolutionary perspective, the life-history strategy of environmental transmission by BA essentially releases its virulence evolution from the constraint of host preservation. On the contrary, killing a host as quickly as possible may increase transmission probabilities, by avoiding a prolonged period of non-transmission in a weakened host. Thus, beyond its ability to produce fulminant infections in hosts, BA seem highly adapted to a life-history strategy of exploiting grazing herbivores.

In conclusion, we find that host foraging responses to carcass sites are dynamic, changing with time from avoidance to attraction to no preference, with the strength and duration of these behavioural states varying among herbivore species. The avoidance period may be sufficient to reduce contact with parasites that only persist for short times in the environment. However, for long-persisting disease agents (such as BA, prions and some coccidia), the ability to survive beyond the initial period of carcass site avoidance may lead to more transmission events than would be expected by chance. These results demonstrate how host foraging ecology and behaviour can affect host-parasite contacts and, ultimately, transmission of environmental parasites in a multi-host natural disease system.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This paper nicely fills out what was laid out in the team's previous paper (see 20140606.2523686), which attracted 2 other papers of comparable interest. I apologise as moderator for providing the whole discussion, but the paper's abstract is very concise and thus only hints at the value of their findings. I do recommend that the whole paper be read.

You have to keep in mind that zebras graze savannah grasslands without meso-landmarks. So the pathogen works best there by advertising its location with a 2-4 square meter wealth of tasty grazing, to bring zebra back and thus have serial infected carcasses to keep the pathogen chuntering on. The zebra helps by being a mega-leaker of bloody body fluids (see 20140617.2547212), which provide nutrients to both the grazing and the pathogen. And as we see in this paper, it has a 1-2 year chance period of infecting other zebra. This reflects Max Stern's observation that in his experience in Natal soil where an animal had died would be a contamination risk for 3 months to 3 years.

Dan Dragon noted in his 2000 dissertation that sites where an infected wood bison carcass had been burnt were, in the Wood Bison National Park, marked by ill-tasting plants that thrive in these burn sites and which were unattractive to grazing bison. Thus while the extent of soil contamination about and under any carcass may be dependent on multiple factors, pro and con, the apparent benefits of carcass burning may be just to undo the soil-vegetation response to the carcass. Bovine carcasses will leave a silhouette-grease patch clear enough to be able to tell where the head and hindquarters were. But whitetail deer and springbok carcasses don't leak -- I can speak to the former, having sampled the soil under more than a few whitetail anthrax carcasses and come up with nothing -- so while anthrax can persist in Namibian zebras with obvious efficiency, I am still puzzled at how we see anthrax outbreaks for, say, 3 out of 5 years in whitetails in west Texas, and the eastern Dakotas and NW Minnesota. What are we missing? - Mod.MHJ

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2843903,163.]
See Also
Anthrax: new ecological research (03) 20140624.2562652
Anthrax: new ecological research (02) 20140617.2547212
Anthrax: new ecological research 20140606.2523686
.................................................mpp/mhj/msp/mpp
</body>
