<header id=006960>
Published Date: 2013-02-21 18:58:51 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Novel coronavirus - East. Med. (07): Saudi Arabia, UK, Germany
Archive Number: 20130221.1554109
</header>
<body id=006960>
NOVEL CORONAVIRUS - EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN (07): SAUDI ARABIA, UK, GERMANY
*************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this report:
[1] Saudi Arabia, UK - WHO update
[2] UK - 4th case in cluster suspected
[3] UK - CIDRAP report
[4] Case investigation, Germany, 2nd Qatari case - Eurosurveillance

******
[1] Saudi Arabia, UK - WHO update
Date: Thu 21 Feb 2013
Source: WHO GAR [Global Alert and Response] [edited]
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2013_02_21/en/index.html


Novel coronavirus infection - update -- 21 Feb 2013
-----------------
The Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia has informed WHO of another confirmed case of infection with the novel coronavirus (NCoV).

The patient was hospitalized on [29 Jan 2013] and died on [10 Feb 2013]. The case was laboratory-confirmed on [18 Feb 2013]. Further investigation into this case is ongoing.

In the United Kingdom, the Health Protection Agency continues to investigate the family cluster where 3 members of the family tested positive for NCoV infection. One member of this family, who had an underlying health condition, has died.

To date, WHO has been informed of a total of 13 confirmed cases of human infection with NCoV, including 7 deaths.

Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States (MS) to continue their surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Testing for the NCoV should be considered in patients with unexplained pneumonias, or in patients with unexplained, severe, progressive or complicated respiratory illness not responding to treatment, particularly in persons traveling from or resident in areas of the world known to be affected.

Any clusters of SARI or SARI in healthcare workers should be thoroughly investigated, regardless of where in the world they occur.

All MS are reminded to promptly assess and notify WHO of any new case or clusters of cases with NCoV infection.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it recommend that any travel or trade restrictions be applied.

WHO continues to closely monitor the situation.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp

[The above report from WHO confirms another fatal case of severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) attributable to infection with the novel coronavirus (nCoV) in a Saudi Arabian resident, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 13 including 7 fatalities. The breakdown of cases (and deaths) by country of report is:
Saudi Arabia: 6 (4 deaths)
Jordan: 2 (2 deaths)
UK: 4 (1 patient from Qatar - under treatment, 3 patients from UK (one with history of travel to Saudi Arabia and Pakistan prior to illness); 1 under treatment, 1 recovered, 1 death)
Germany: 1 (patient from Qatar - discharged).

For the interactive HealthMap/ProMED map of the Middle East, see http://healthmap.org/r/1HAJ.

For the interactive HealthMap/ProMED map of the UK, see http://healthmap.org/r/1lNY. - Mod.MPP]

******
[2] UK - 4th case in cluster suspected
Date: Thu 21 Feb 2013
Source: The Canadian Press via The Province [edited]
http://www.theprovince.com/health/There+have+been+fourth+case+coronavirus+f=amily+cluster/7995904/story.html


There may have been a 4th case in UK coronavirus family cluster: WHO
-----------------------------------------------------------
British authorities announced Tuesday [19 Feb 2013] that another person has died from infection with the new coronavirus as European scientists revealed the new virus easily infects the cells of the airways of the human lung.

The current cluster of novel coronavirus cases in Britain may have included another infection, a World Health Organization official says.

To date, 3 members of an extended family have tested positive for the new virus, which is a cousin of the SARS coronavirus. One of the 3 died earlier this week [see prior ProMED-mail post Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (06): UK, fatality 20130220.1552014].

But officials investigating how the virus moved from one member of the family to the next suspect another relative may have contracted the virus and may even have spread it to the 3rd confirmed case in the cluster. This 4th family member had a respiratory illness but was not tested until after she recovered, at which point the test came back negative.

Dr. Anthony Mounts, the WHO's point person for the new coronavirus outbreak, says the U.K. cluster adds slightly to the WHO's concern over the virus, but in the main serves to confirm some things the organization has already strongly suspected.

Those are: In some circumstances, person-to-person spread can occur, though so far, it appears those chains of infection has been short. And while the 1st few cases spotted all involved severe illness, some infections can produce mild symptoms only.

The WHO revised its new coronavirus case definition this week to remind doctors not to automatically rule out people with mild symptoms when they look for possible cases. And Mounts says the organization's recommendations on how to do surveillance for cases will also be updated.

Mild infections are a mixed blessing. Obviously everyone would hope the virus didn't always cause severe disease. But people suffering only mild infections may be more likely to spread the virus, if the virus transmits easily.

That's because people sick enough to be in hospital ICUs mainly encounter health-care workers protected by masks, but people with mild respiratory infections generally go about their daily life. And mild infections are much harder to spot, especially when they occur during cold and flu season.

The 3rd confirmed case in this cluster had only mild symptoms and has since recovered. "The fact that she had such a mild illness really does raise our concerns about what we might be missing," Mounts admits.

Others share the WHO's concern. In fact, several of the researchers who were key players in the response to the 2002-2003 SARS epidemic admit the patterns they are seeing bring back memories.

"It is certainly beginning to look concerning, given the obvious fact that there can be onward transmission," says Malik Peiris, chair of the department of microbiology at the University of Hong Kong.

"It is somewhat reminiscent of the emergence of SARS in 2002."

Ron Fouchier, a virologist at Erasmus Medical Centre in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, also sees those similarities.

And Fouchier is concerned about how many infections may be going unnoticed, untested or unreported. He notes that several of the 12 confirmed cases were diagnosed in European hospitals.

In addition to the current family cluster in Britain, one case from Qatar was diagnosed in Britain in September [2012] [see prior ProMED-mail post: Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (03): UK HPA, WHO, Qatar 20120923.1305982] and a 2nd from Qatar was diagnosed in Germany in October [2012] [see prior ProMED-mail post: Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (18): WHO, new cases, cluster 20121123.1421664]. Both men got sick in Qatar but left the country for treatment - a practice that is not uncommon for wealthy residents of Middle Eastern countries.

"The fact that we are finding these cases in Europe and not anywhere else, that has to raise suspicion," Fouchier says. "What we're seeing in Europe is just the tip of the iceberg and we really have no clue how big the iceberg is."

Saudi Arabia has reported 5 cases, the most recent in late November [2012] [see above WHO report in section [1] -- there are now 6 confirmed cases in Saudi Arabia, most recent date of onset 29 Jan 2013 - Mod.MPP]. Qatar has had the 2 confirmed cases. And Jordan has reported 2 cases, but the confirmations came months after the 2 individuals died [see prior ProMED-mail posts below].

Samples taken during an unexplained respiratory outbreak at a Jordanian hospital last April [2012] were tested for the virus late last year [see prior ProMED-mail post from 30 Nov 2012: Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean: WHO, Jordan, conf., RFI 20121130.1432498 - Mod.MPP]. At the time of the outbreak, the existence of the virus was not yet known.

Fouchier feels not enough is being done to find cases or to track down the source of the virus.

The virus's genetic sequence indicates it likely comes from bats, but it still isn't clear how people are becoming infected. "We know that humans don't come into contact with bats a whole lot," Fouchier says.

He and other experts suspect there may be some intermediate host -- a domestic animal, perhaps -- that is being infected and is passing on the virus to people.

Mounts says the WHO is trying to get countries to look harder for the virus. "We're concerned and really watching it very closely and trying to push people to do more investigation."

He also says the organization is putting together networks of experts to help it with the coronavirus situation -- an approach the WHO used with much success during the SARS outbreak.

A laboratory network and a network of expert epidemiologists -- sometimes called disease detectives -- are being set up. As well, a group of clinical experts who have advised the WHO over the past decade on possible treatments for H5N1 -- bird flu -- and during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic is being reactivated to help with this situation, Mounts says.

[Byline: Helen Branswell]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The information of a 4th family member with a history of a mild respiratory illness but negative on laboratory testing for infection with the novel coronavirus (nCoV) is a recurrent theme thus far in the history of laboratory confirmation of cases in suspected clusters -- mild respiratory illnesses have been observed in contacts of confirmed cases, but on laboratory testing (often retrospective testing) these individuals are found to be negative by current tests available. Of note was that the 3rd confirmed case in this cluster in the UK, (discussed in further detail in the CIDRAP report below), did have a milder illness and was confirmed through laboratory testing, the 1st milder presentation of illness that has been laboratory confirmed.

In an earlier post, this moderator raised the possibility that we may well be seeing a prospective evolution of an outbreak similar to what we saw with SARS - early sporadic cases, followed by smaller clusters and then larger clusters and more "widespread" dissemination of the organism. While one hopes that there will be less of a nosocomial transmission of this organism in contrast with SARS, reading some of the details of the cases reported in earlier reports when patients were transferred from other countries, and of other suspected clusters, the absence of strict adherence to respiratory isolation in the early presentations of these cases may well be associated with nosocomial transmission.

There clearly are many unknowns about the epidemiology of this organism. Information on results of studies on the possible prevalence nCoV infection of animals in Saudi Arabia and Qatar are still pending. As mentioned above and in prior reports, genetic studies on this nCoV place it related to CoVs found in bats, but how did the jump from bats to humans occur? Is there an intermediate host animal? - Mod.MPP]

******
[3] UK - CIDRAP report, details on 3rd case
Date: Tue 19 Feb 2013
Source: Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy (CIDRAP) [edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/cidrap/content/other/news/feb1913coronabr.html


British man dies from novel coronavirus infection
-----------------------------------------
One patient in a British family cluster of novel coronavirus (NCoV) infections, a 38-year-old man with an underlying medical condition, has died, and fresh details about a recently reported mild case have sparked new questions about how the virus is spreading and how big a threat it poses.

The man died [17 Feb 2013] in the critical care unit at Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, where he had been undergoing treatment for a chronic health condition, the hospital said in a statement today. He was immunocompromised, and health officials believe he was exposed to NCoV by sustained close contact with a sick relative, a 60-year-old man who was hospitalized in Manchester shortly after traveling in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia.

He received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), a heart-lung-bypass procedure designed to allow disease-damaged lungs to heal. His death raises the number of fatalities from the new virus to 6 of the 12 cases reported so far.

Mild infection raises transmission questions
The UK Health Protection Agency (HPA) today released new information about the 3rd patient in the family cluster, who has recovered from a milder version of the illnesses after more limited contact: visiting the older man in the hospital on 3 occasions. The 3rd patient had no contact with the man who died and, according to a new risk assessment from the European Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (ECDC), is a 30-year-old woman.

Neither the woman nor the patient who died had a recent travel history, and HPA and ECDC officials have said both cases provide further evidence of person-to-person NCoV spread, but so far there is no sign of sustained transmission.

The woman's limited contact with the man who died raises the possibility of an intermediary case within the extended family, the HPA said. The ECDC also noted the limited time the woman spent with the older patient, which it said might point to an intermediary case or fomite spread. "However, the investigation and intensive case finding around the 3 cases remain ongoing and the results cannot be prejudged," the agency said.

Public health authorities are tracing the contacts of the family members, including people who sat within 2 rows of the older man on a flight from Saudi Arabia to London, during which he first felt ill. Follow-up is also underway on health workers, patients, family, and friends who were in contact with the patients in hospital settings.

Health officials reconsider threat assessments
John Watson, MB BS, MSC, the HPA's head of respiratory diseases, said in the statement that the routes of NCoV transmission haven't been fully determined, but the recent UK cases show strong evidence of human-to-human spread in some circumstances.

"The 3 recent cases in the UK represent an important opportunity to obtain more information about the characteristics of this infection in humans and risk factors for its acquisition, particularly in the light of the 1st ever recorded instance of apparently lower severity of illness in one of the cases," he said.

The risk of infection in contacts is still considered low, and the threat to the general UK population remains very low, the HPA said.

Meanwhile, the ECDC said recent developments with the 3 UK cases increase the threat to the European Union, because the infection came to Europe on a commercial flight and resulted in 2 more illnesses, though the cluster is isolated to one family.

Emergence of a mild secondary case, the 1st of its kind, is worrisome, because other mild illnesses that are missed during NCoV detection efforts could spread the infection, the ECDC said. More work is needed to flesh out the illness spectrum, such as whether it causes severe disease of uncommon zoonotic origin, as well as mild or even asymptomatic infections, it said in the risk assessment.

Also, the emergence of the mild illness and the possibility that surveillance will find more of them raises questions about whether new case-finding strategies are needed, the ECDC said, noting that it is reviewing the issue with its member countries and global health partners.

Though it's reassuring that health officials have found no expanding case clusters, "the fact remains that there is a lot more that we do not know than we know about this virus," the ECDC said, adding that discussions are underway to provide guidance on research priorities.

Study finds NCoV easily infects lung lining
In a related development today, a European research group reported that the NCoV easily penetrates human airway passages and evades the immune system like other coronaviruses, such as one responsible for the common cold. The findings were published today in mBio, the online journal of the American Society for Microbiology (ASM).

The team used cultured bronchial cells that were engineered to mimic the epithelial lining to explore how well the new virus could infect and multiply. Their findings suggest that the airway cells are highly susceptible to NCoV infection, and the virus multiplied faster than the SARS virus, another member of the coronavirus family.

Volker Thiel, a study coauthor with the Institute of Immunobiology at Kantonal Hospital in St. Gallen, Switzerland, said today in an ASM press release that though data suggest the virus may have jumped from animals to humans very recently, it is just as well-adapted to infecting the human respiratory tract as other more familiar coronaviruses, which was surprising.

The investigators suspected that the NCoV uses the same strategy as other common coronaviruses to evade the immune system, and they tested the notion by pretreating epithelial cells with lambda-type interferon to boost their immune response.

They reported that the treatment significantly reduced the number of infected cells, which is encouraging, given that interferons are promising for treating SARS and hepatitis C.

In another lab-related development, the World Health Organization (WHO) today issued updated interim recommendations for managing NCoV lab risks. The document includes epidemiological developments that have occurred since the last update on [31 Oct 2012].

The guidance urges labs conducting routine tests to follow biosafety level 2 (BSL 2) practices, that labs working with viral isolates from clinical samples use additional containment practices, including those recommended for BSL 3, and that work with animals infected with NCoV take place in an animal BSL 3 facility [BSL 3 labs are used with biologic agents the may cause serious or potentially lethal disease through inhalation of the agent whereas BLS 2 labs are those working with biologic agents that pose moderate hazards to personnel and the environment. For background information on the 4 laboratory biosafety levels, see http://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/bmbl5_sect_iv.pdf. - Mod.MPP]

[Byline: Lisa Schnirring]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The above report summarizes the information available on the descriptive epidemiology of the cases in the cluster, and raises the possibility of yet another case in the cluster. It also highlights the possible additional contacts of the index case who was apparently ill when flying back to the UK after visiting Saudi Arabia and Pakistan. In the HPA report on 19 Feb 2013, there was mention of followup on 100 known contacts of this cluster, presumably including individuals who were seated near this case while travelling to the UK from Saudi Arabia. - Mod.MPP]

******
[4] Case investigation, Germany, 2nd Qatari case - Eurosurveillance
Date: Thu 21 Feb 2013
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 18, Issue 8, 21 February 2013 [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20406


Contact investigation of a case of human novel coronavirus infection treated in a German hospital, October-November 2012
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
On [24 Oct 2012], a patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome of unknown origin and symptom onset on [5 Oct 2012] was transferred from Qatar to a specialist lung clinic in Germany. Late diagnosis on [20 Nov 2012] of an infection with the novel Coronavirus (NCoV) resulted in potential exposure of a considerable number of healthcare workers. Using a questionnaire we asked 123 identified contacts (120 hospital and 3 out-of-hospital contacts) about exposure to the patient. 85 contacts provided blood for a serological test using a 2-stage approach with an initial immunofluorescence assay as screening test, followed by recombinant immunofluorescence assays and a NCoV-specific serum neutralisation test. Of 123 identified contacts 9 had performed aerosol-generating procedures within the 3rd or 4th week of illness, using personal protective equipment rarely or never, and 2 of these developed acute respiratory illness. Serology was negative for all 9. Further 76 hospital contacts also tested negative, including 2 sera initially reactive in the screening test. The contact investigation ruled out transmission to contacts after illness day 20. Our 2-stage approach for serological testing may be used as a template for similar situations.

Introduction
----------
A novel human coronavirus (NCoV) has recently emerged in the Arabian Peninsula. The first 2 reported cases infected by the novel agent, then provisionally termed hCoV-EMC, occurred in June and September 2012, respectively [1-3]. As of [18 Feb 2013], a total of 12 cases have been confirmed by WHO [4], including 5 deaths. Among 5 cases reported from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 3 were part of a family cluster. Two further cases were linked to probable exposure in Qatar, and 2 cases were confirmed retrospectively, by diagnostic of respiratory specimens, from Jordan with disease onset in April 2012. The latter were part of a cluster of 11 patients with acute respiratory symptoms linked to a hospital [5]. The most recent 3 cases identified constitute another cluster that occurred in the United Kingdom (UK) in January to February 2013 [4]. The index case in this cluster is a UK citizen with travel history to Saudi-Arabia and Pakistan before symptom onset [5]. Two of his family members who had not travelled outside the UK and became ill were most likely infected through person-to-person transmission. While one of them had an underlying disease and died, the other presented with milder, influenza-like illness symptoms only.

Because of the long period, 10 months, over which the cases occurred, the source and transmission patterns of the virus remain elusive. Hypotheses include a predominance of zoonotic acquisitions with little potential for human-to-human transmission [5], widespread and unnoticed occurrence of clinically mild infections, and finally the possibility of an early-stage epidemic caused by a highly pathogenic novel human virus.

Because of the potential of human-to-human transmission in the hospital outbreak in Jordan and the family clusters, as well as the observed severity of disease, current recommendations regarding protective measures rely on experiences with severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003 [6]. The 1st of the 2 Qatari patients was treated in the UK where, under strict isolation measures, no secondary cases occurred. Investigations by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of 10 healthcare workers (HCW) who had cared for the patient and subsequently developed mild respiratory disease yielded no evidence of infection [7]. However, to date, published investigations of individuals with proven exposure to NCoV have not presented a strategy how to identify retrospectively infections in a large group of (contact) persons through serological testing.

On [22 Nov 2012], the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin, Germany, was informed according to the International Health Regulations [8] about a case of NCoV infection in a Quatari patient in his 40s, treated in Germany (Figure). After an acute onset of symptoms on [5 Oct 2012], he had been admitted to a hospital in Doha, Qatar, on [13 Oct 2012], where he developed respiratory failure requiring ventilation, and was reported to have had temporary renal impairment. On [24 Oct 2012], he was transferred to a specialist lung hospital in Essen, Germany. A respiratory sample had been taken in Qatar on [17 Oct 2012]. After some delay due to difficulties with the shipment of specimens, the sample tested positive for NCoV in a laboratory in the UK. The result was consequently communicated by the UK Health Protection Agency to the World Health Organization (WHO) on [21 Nov 2012]. Until that date the hospital in Essen had not considered NCoV in the differential diagnoses for the patient. Only routine personal protection of HCW and no specific measures of respiratory protection had been followed during the whole course of treatment in the intensive care unit (ICU). After weeks of mechanical ventilation in ICU, the patient was discharged on [21 Nov 2012].

[Figure: Timeline of disease of novel coronavirus case and possible exposure of healthcare workers, Germany, October-November 2012, available at above given URL]

A lag time of 4 weeks between patient transfer and laboratory confirmation of the NCoV infection resulted in potential exposure of a considerable number of HCW in Germany. Here we report on an interview with the patient asking for potential sources of infection, the investigation of individuals exposed to the patient, virological investigation of respiratory samples from the patient as well as an approach used to test retrospectively a large number of contacts.

Methods [see above given URL for details of methods]

Results
------
Patient interview
The patient reported to live in Doha, Qatar. He used to be a heavy smoker (2 to 3 packs of cigarettes per day), but denied smoking waterpipe or chewing qat [also known as khat, qat, gat or Arabian tea (Catha edulis), is a flowering plant native to the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. It contains cathinone, an amphetamine-like stimulant, which is known produce excitement, decreased appetite and euphoria. see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khat. - Mod.MPP] Disease onset was rapid, with initial symptoms including fever (40 C), cough, runny nose, and shortness of breath. Subjective weakness was pronounced. After the 1st 2 days of illness he improved a little but deteriorated again, and was finally admitted to hospital on day 8 of illness because of increasing dyspnoea. He reported no subjective symptoms of renal impairment such as foamy urine, reduced urine output, or back pain. He had not travelled and had no known contact with any other reported cases of NCoV infection. The patient owned a camel and goat farm and reported a large number of casual contacts (approx. 50 persons per day) on a regular basis. He remembered that before his disease onset some goats were ill and had fever. He did not have direct contact with the goats or any other animals especially falcons or bats, but said he had eaten goat meat. He also reported to have had contact with one of his animal caretakers who was ill with severe cough and was hospitalised. Other than the animal caretaker, he did not remember persons with severe respiratory illnesses in his wider or closer social environment.

Patient samples
Virus detection in the initial sample from illness day 20 and preliminary serological investigations have been described by Corman et al. [10]. Isolation of virus in cell culture failed. Serological testing yielded an IgM titre against NCoV of 1:1000 and an IgG titre of 1:10 000 at day 20 (week 3) of illness. At week 8 of illness the IgG titre was still at 1:10 000 while the IgM titre had already decreased to 1:100. SNT titres against NCoV were 1:640 at week 3 and 1:640 at week 8 of illness. The pharyngeal wash sample taken on [23 Nov 2012] (week 8 of illness) tested negative by real-time RT-PCR.

Contact investigation
We identified 120 hospital and 3 out-of-hospital contacts, including the interpreter of the patient. Protective measures were largely limited to HCW wearing gloves and gowns when providing intimate care and use of surgical face masks during suctioning. From [31 Oct 2012 until 4 Nov 2012] (illness weeks 5 and 6), the patient was isolated using barrier nursing due to a concurrent Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. This included use of surgical masks only. Among the 120 hospital contacts the largest group were nurses (n=59; 49 percent), followed by physicians (n=26; 22 percent) and laboratory technicians (n=15; 13 percent) [see Table 1: Profession, type of contact, occurrence of acute respiratory illness and serological results in contacts of case of novel coronavirus infection, Germany October-November 2012 at above given URL]. Median time from 1st contact to venipuncture was 39 days (range: 13-50 days).

85 (69 percent) of all respondents reported contact at a distance of less than or equal to 2 m, 14 (11 percent) of more than 2 m, and 24 (20 percent) of unknown distance to the patient. Frequency of ARI by week of 1st contact differed significantly among the groups (Table 1). However, there was no trend in the ARI proportion over time: 8 of 33 contacts with 1st exposure during illness weeks 3 or 4 experienced ARI within 10 days of last contact; 5 of 9 contacts with 1st exposure during the patient's 5th week of illness; and none of 14 with 1st contact during week 6 of illness developed ARI.

Among 81 contacts reporting exposure within 2 m, 21 had ARI compared to none of 14 with contact of more than 2 m (p value; 0.04) (Table 1). Among those with 1st exposure in week 3 or 4 of illness of the patient, the proportion of contacts with ARI was not significantly different between those considered to be at high risk and the remaining contacts (p value, 0.87) (Table 1). 13 HCW had contact to the patient in weeks 3 or 4 of illness, had contact within 2 m to the patient and had worn surgical face masks rarely or never. Among these, 9 were high-risk contacts, including one nurse who assisted in a bronchoscopy on [25 Oct 2012]. All 9 provided a blood sample. The median time after last contact with the patient for these 9 HCW was 32 days (range: 13-46 days). No sample was reactive by IFA.

Of the remaining 76 blood samples, one serum showed reactivity for IgM even at dilutions up to 1:100. This titre could be resolved as a cross-reacting recent infection with hCoV-NL63 by IFA using recombinant S and N proteins from major hCoVs [see Table 2: Cross-reactivity test on contact persons and of case of novel coronavirus infection (at week 3 and week 8 of illness) with recombinant spike and nucleocapsid indirect fluorescence antibody testa, Germany, October-November 2012
at above given URL], as well as absence of NCoV-specific neutralising antibodies. Another serum showed indeterminate IgG-reactivity in a 1:10 dilution. Specific anti-NCoV antibodies were ruled out by recombinant IFA, indicating earlier infection with hCoV-OC43 and hCoV-NL63, as well as absence of any significant titre in SNT (Table 2).

Discussion
---------
Here we describe a case and contact investigation of a laboratory-confirmed patient with NCoV infection for whom the suspicion of this possible aetiology had not been discussed with the treating hospital upon admission of the patient. The patient still tested PCR-positive late in his 3rd week of illness. Despite this we concluded from the laboratory findings that his infectiousness was then absent or very low. While at that time no consistent dedicated personal protective measures had been applied by HCW caring for the patient, our public health investigation did not show infection in any of the 85 serologically tested contact persons, mainly HCW. The conducted serological 2-stage approach was an effective method of screening a large number of contact persons for infection.

For initial risk assessment, after the information in November [2012] about the cause of the patient's disease, it was important to know if he had been potentially infectious at the time of arrival at the hospital in Germany in October [2012]. One stored respiratory sample taken at the time of admission, yielded clear, albeit very low quantities of NCoV RNA in the range of 66.5 to 100 copies per mL [10]. Attempts to isolate virus from this sample were unsuccessful. Even though the sample had been stored for prolonged time under less-than-optimal conditions, these combined RT-PCR and cell culture data suggested absent or very low infectiousness at the time of admission. Negative RT-PCR 4 weeks later, just after discharge from hospital, suggested the patient had cleared the virus, and no further respiratory precautions were necessary upon admission to the rehabilitation centre.

Nevertheless, anxiety and lack of any other epidemiological data made it necessary to gauge rapidly the significance of some cases of ARI experienced in HCW who had been in contact with the patient. Our data yielded no direct correlation of ARI rates with time of exposure. In particular, those contacts considered at highest risk had no more ARI than other contacts who also had their first contact with the patient during the third or fourth illness week.

In the context of a retrospective contact investigation, our 2-staged serological approach proved effective in ruling out any NCoV infections among contacts including those who developed acute respiratory disease. Preliminary screening using a generic serological test provides a reliable result for negative samples. Hereafter only positive or indeterminate results need to be further scrutinised using the described methods.

During 2 interviews that the patient kindly agreed to, we explored a wide spectrum of factors that he might have been exposed to. Even though NCoV is genetically similar to bat coronaviruses [1,13,14], other animals may serve as (intermediate) host as well. While our patient denied contact to bats, he remembered ill goats among the animals on his farm. Albarrak et al. reported that the first Saudi case was exposed to farm animals, but the 1st Qatari patient and the 2nd Saudi patient were not [15]. Although our patient reported no direct contact with his animals, one animal caretaker working for him was ill with cough and might have been an intermediate link in the chain of infection.

Coronaviruses do infect ruminants such as goats [16] and thus goats could be considered as a possible source of origin for the novel virus, particularly in the geographical and cultural context of our patient. Recent experimental studies have found that NCoV can infect and replicate in cells of various species including humans, swine, monkeys and bats, suggesting a more promiscuous host specificity compared to other human coronaviruses such as SARS CoV [17]. Susceptibility of goat cells was not tested, but it cannot be excluded that NCoV might infect this species as well.

Especially hospitals with ICU, specialist lung hospitals and similar facilities should consider NCoV in patients with severe respiratory disease of unknown aetiology. These patients should be tested for the novel virus as well as pathogens causing illnesses that need to be considered for differential diagnosis in severe lung disease. Full personal protective equipment such as recommended for handling patients with SARS, including N95 masks independent of the procedure performed, should be used by HCW in such cases, and responsible public health agencies should be informed timely. In general, it is prudent that HCW in contact with any patient with a severe respiratory illness of unknown origin apply droplet precautions. Should patients with suspected NCoV infections be transferred for special treatment it is important to fully inform the receiving hospital. Public health management recommendations should be further informed through future research that include the route, amount and duration of virus shedding. In addition, more information is needed on the ability of the virus to transmit from person to person.

Our investigation has some important limitations. We have not obtained a questionnaire and blood from all contacts of this patient. Nevertheless, response rate was high and information on contacts with the highest risk for infection was complete. Available information on the interval between exposure and venipuncture could only be approximated because contacts were exposed over more than one day. In our study we used the day of 1st contact because the patient was likely most infectious at this point in time. Theoretically, seroconversion may have occurred in some after contacts had provided blood. However, the need to rapidly evaluate the situation urged us to commence the contact investigation immediately. A further limitation is that the patient's negative result of virus isolation could have been due to the long storage time of the sample - in contrast to our favoured hypothesis of low RNA concentration.

In spite of this, we believe that it is fair to conclude the patient's infectiousness on illness day 20 was absent or very low. Our contact investigation has found no evidence of infection among hospital or out-of-hospital contacts. Our 2-staged approach to serological screening where a 1st-line testing is done by full-virus IFA and supplemented by confirmatory recombinant IFA and SNT should provide a template for similar investigations in the future. Finally, if patients suspected to be infected with NCoV are to be transferred for specialised treatment, receiving hospitals need to be informed so that appropriate infection control measures can be implemented.

References [available at above given URL].

[Reported by: U Buchholz 1,2, M A Müller 3,2, A Nitsche 1,2, A Sanewski 4,2, N Wevering 5, T Bauer-Balci 6, F Bonin 5, C Drosten 3, B Schweiger 1, T Wolff 1, D Muth 3, B Meyer 3, S Buda 1, G Krause 1, L Schaade 1, W Haas 1
1. Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany
2. These authors contributed equally to this work
3. University Bonn, Department of Virology, Bonn, Germany
4. County health department of Essen, Essen, Germany
5. Ruhrland hospital, Essen, Germany
6. County health department Oberbergischer Kreis, Gummersbach, Germany]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Given the cluster in the UK currently under investigation, the above study provides a framework for addressing some of the questions re: contacts and illness, albeit the case under study in this report had 1st contact with the hospital staff in Germany on day 19 of illness. It would be interesting to conduct a similar study among health care personnel caring for this patient in Qatar, with contact exposure in the hospital in Qatar on day 8 of illness as well as family and friends of the patient who may have had contact with him during the 1st week of his illness. Laboratory testing of the animal caretaker on this case's farm might also be helpful as well as studies on the animals on the farm.

So many questions remain. We eagerly await results of additional studies conducted in the field in Saudi Arabia and Qatar. - Mod.MPP]

[

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1HAJ, http://healthmap.org/r/1lNY.]
See Also
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (06): UK, fatality 20130220.1552014
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (05): UK, 3rd case, 20130215.1544940
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Med. (04): UK, pers to pers trans susp 20130213.1541531
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Med. (03): Saudi comment 20130212.1540011
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Med. (02): UK ex Saudi Arabia, Pakistan 20130212.1539086
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean: bat reservoir 20130122.1508656
2012
----
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (06): comments 20121225.1468821
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (05): WHO, transmission route 20121223.1465597
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (04): receptor charact. 20121211.1446670
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (03): research, ISARIC (UK) 20121208.1443486
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean (02): diagnostics 20121207.1442473
Novel coronavirus - Eastern Mediterranean: WHO, Jordan, conf., RFI 20121130.1432498
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (19): Singapore: NOT 20121129.1430397
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (18): WHO, new cases, cluster 20121123.1421664
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (17): 4th case, RFI 20121121.1418018
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (16): whole genome sequence 20121114.1409556
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (15): new case 20121104.1391285
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (14): KSA MOH 20121022.1358297
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (13): history, collateral damage 20121021.1356623
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (12): RFI 20121019.1353615
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (11): clin. lab. & epi. investigations 20121004.1324712
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (10): WHO, revised case def. 20120930.1315960
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (09): real-time RT-PCR, addition 20120929.1315725
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (08): real-time RT-PCR assay 20120928.1314254
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (07): Eurosurveillance reports 20120928.1313337
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (06) 20120927.1311743
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (05): WHO, case def., nomenclature 20120926.1309747
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (04): RFI, Jordan, April 2012 20120925.1308001
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (03): UK HPA, WHO, Qatar 20120923.1305982
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (02): additional cases, RFI 20120923.1305931
Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia: human isolate 20120920.1302733
.................................................mpp/ml
</body>
