<header id=042505>
Published Date: 2022-05-19 05:26:25 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Monkeypox - North America: USA (MA)
Archive Number: 20220519.8703351
</header>
<body id=042505>
MONKEYPOX - NORTH AMERICA: USA (MASSACHUSETTS)
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 18 May 2022
Source: Massachusetts Department of Public Health [edited]
https://www.mass.gov/news/massachusetts-public-health-officials-confirm-case-of-monkeypox


Massachusetts public health officials confirm case of monkeypox
---------------------------------------------------------------
The confirmed case poses no risk to the general public.

The Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH) today [18 May 2022] confirmed a single case of monkeypox virus infection in an adult male with recent travel to Canada. Initial testing was completed late Tuesday [17 May 2022] at the State Public Health Laboratory in Jamaica Plain and confirmatory testing was completed today [18 May 2022] at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). DPH is working closely with the CDC, relevant local boards of health, and the patient's healthcare providers to identify individuals who may have been in contact with the patient while he was infectious. This contact tracing approach is the most appropriate given the nature and transmission of the virus. The case poses no risk to the public, and the individual is hospitalized and in good condition.

Monkeypox is a rare but potentially serious viral illness that typically begins with flu-like illness and swelling of the lymph nodes and progresses to a rash on the face and body. Most infections last 2-to-4 weeks. In parts of central and west Africa where monkeypox occurs, people can be exposed through bites or scratches from rodents and small mammals, preparing wild game, or having contact with an infected animal or possibly animal products. The virus does not spread easily between people; transmission can occur through contact with body fluids, monkeypox sores, items that have been contaminated with fluids or sores (clothing, bedding, etc.), or through respiratory droplets following prolonged face-to-face contact.

No monkeypox cases have previously been identified in the United States in 2022; Texas and Maryland each reported a case in 2021 in people with recent travel to Nigeria. Since early May 2022, the United Kingdom has identified 9 cases of monkeypox; the first case had recently traveled to Nigeria. None of the other cases have reported recent travel. UK health officials report that the most recent cases in the UK are in men who have sex with men.

Based on findings of the Massachusetts case and the recent cases in the UK, clinicians should consider a diagnosis of monkeypox in people who present with an otherwise unexplained rash and
1: traveled, in the last 30 days, to a country that has recently had confirmed or suspected cases of monkeypox 2) report contact with a person or people with confirmed or suspected monkeypox, or
3: is a man who reports sexual contact with other men.
This clinical guidance is consistent with recommendations from UK health officials and US federal health officials, based on identified cases.

Suspected cases may present with early flu-like symptoms and progress to lesions that may begin on one site on the body and spread to other parts. Illness could be clinically confused with a sexually transmitted infection like syphilis or herpes, or with varicella-zoster virus. The CDC plans to issue public information soon on poxvirus infections which, when available, will be found here.

For more about this virus, visit https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/.

--
communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

******
[2] USA: overview
Date: Wed 18 May 2022
Source: STAT [edited]
https://www.statnews.com/2022/05/18/spain-portugal-report-monkeypox-cases-raising-specter-of-wider-outbreak/


The United States confirmed a case of monkeypox infection on Wednesday [18 May 2022] in a man who recently traveled to Canada. It is not yet clear if the man, who lives in Massachusetts and who traveled to Canada by car, is connected to the growing outbreak of monkeypox cases in Europe. The case was announced in a statement posted to the website of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health [https://www.mass.gov/news/massachusetts-public-health-officials-confirm-case-of-monkeypox]. Confirmatory testing was done by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which had warned earlier on Wednesday that cases in the US were likely to be detected.

The development adds the United States and possibly Canada to a growing list of countries reporting monkeypox cases in an outbreak first spotted in the United Kingdom. The Public Health Agency of Canada said in a statement late on Wednesday [18 May 2022] that no cases have been reported at this time.

Most of the cases have been detected in men who are gay, bisexual, or are men who have sex with men, she confirmed but cautioned against over-focusing on that fact. "We're finding where we're looking," Van Kerkhove said, noting that countries have been contacting sexual health clinics asking about patients with unusual rashes. It is important that other health care providers in other settings -- general practitioners, dermatologists, and others -- are aware of the possibility they might see monkeypox cases so that if the virus is spreading more broadly, they take adequate precautions and those cases aren't missed.

The details that have come to light so far raise the prospect of an outbreak that is even more geographically widespread, said Michael Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota's Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy. "There could be dynamic transmission here that we just haven't appreciated because of the potential number of contacts," he said, adding it will be important to collect information about how much intimate contact patients have had and where those contacts may have come from.

Tom Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said a number of countries outside Central and West Africa, where monkeypox is commoner, have experience coping with introductions of the virus, so there is a possibility that the outbreaks will be "relatively small." "I think that's still probable, given the past," Inglesby told STAT. "But on the other hand, this is starting off with much more of a foothold, in a much more distributed way, and we don't understand how it got ... into those networks." "This could have the potential to move around and is going to require pretty strong public education efforts in affected communities and maybe even more broadly, so that people recognize the possibility" of monkeypox infection, he said.

The UK Health Security Agency announced on Wednesday [18 May 2022] that it had detected 2 additional cases, bringing to 9 the number reported there this month. Prior to this outbreak, the UK had only ever detected 7 monkeypox cases. The 2 latest cases had not traveled to the countries where monkeypox virus is endemic, and have no known links to any of the prior cases "so it is possible they acquired the infection through community transmission," the agency said in a statement, adding that recent cases have been predominantly among men who identify as gay, bisexual, or who have sex with men.

On Tuesday [17 May 2022], CDC signaled it was worried about the state of the outbreak in the UK and the potential that cases would be found in other countries. "We do have a level of concern that this is very different than what we typically think of from monkeypox," said Jennifer McQuiston, deputy director of CDC's division of high consequence pathogens and pathology. "We don't understand how many other cases could be out there in the UK, for example, with undefined chains of transmission. We have a sense that there might be some unusual methods of transmission, through intimate contact or some form of close personal contact that we've not previously associated with monkeypox."

WHO, which previously designated monkeypox as a priority pathogen, has organized a meeting of experts on monkeypox and orthopoxviruses -- the wider family of poxviruses -- for early next week. Among the issues, the experts will likely tackle is an apparent change in the epidemiology of the disease in countries where the virus is endemic that has occurred in recent years. "We're seeing a shift in the age distribution of cases. We're seeing a shift in the geographic distribution of cases," said Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO's Health Emergencies Program. "We have to really understand that deep ecology. We have to really understand human behavior in those regions and we have to try to prevent the disease from reaching humans in the first place."

The monkeypox virus is related to the variola virus, which caused smallpox, a once dreaded disease that was declared eradicated in 1980. The symptoms of monkeypox are similar but milder than smallpox. Infected people develop flu-like symptoms -- fever, body aches, chills -- but also swollen lymph nodes. Within 1-3 days of the onset of fever, a distinctive rash appears, often starting on the face. Many conditions can cause rashes but the monkeypox rash has some unusual features, notably the fact that vesicles can form on the palms of the hands. In countries where it is endemic, the virus is believed to mainly spread to people from infected animals when people kill or prepare bushmeat for consumption.

Once the virus jumps to people, human-to-human transmission can occur via respiratory droplets -- virus-laced saliva that can infect the mucosal membranes of the eyes, nose, and throat -- or by contact with monkeypox lesions or bodily fluids, with the virus entering through small cuts in the skin. It can also be transmitted by contact with clothing or linens contaminated with material from monkeypox lesions.

Cases outside of Africa have been rare, though there was a large outbreak in the United States in 2003 that involved 47 confirmed and probable cases in 6 states. That outbreak, the first reported from outside of Africa, was traced back to the importation of small mammals from Ghana.

However, in the past few years, there have been small increases in exported monkeypox cases. The US detected 2 in 2021, both in travelers who had returned from Nigeria. The UK has seen multiple importations in the past few years and Israel and Singapore have also detected cases.

McQuiston said the number of exported cases from Nigeria, in particular, appears to be at odds with the reported number of cases in the country itself. "I think that we are concerned about the number of exported cases in travelers we've seen. And to have so many of them in the last few years is simply a flag to us that there's a lot more monkeypox transmission happening in Nigeria than perhaps the [official] numbers would suggest," she said. "And I think it also is a flag to us that the more traditional routes of transmission that we think of such as hunting wild animals, contact with bushmeat, living at that interface between the jungle and small communities does not seem to be a driver of transmission in terms of what we see happening. And so that makes us cast a wider net about what risk factors might be."

There is no licensed vaccine to protect against monkeypox, nor are there specific drugs for the disease. [There is a vaccine. Bavarian Nordic's Jynneos vaccine was licensed by the FDA in 2019 for smallpox and monkeypox. - Mod.TY]. But it is believed that vaccines and drugs developed and stockpiled as a hedge against a return of smallpox are useful. In the 2003 outbreak in the US, smallpox vaccine was used.

WHO's Van Kerkhove noted that some of these products have been licensed using what is known as the animal rule, where animal efficacy data are used as a surrogate because the lack of circulating smallpox means the vaccines or drugs can't be tested for efficacy in people. As a result, any such product could only be used in the context of a clinical trial, she said. "There are options. We just have to make sure that they're used appropriately. One of the things related to vaccines is we want to make sure if the vaccines are needed and used, they're used among populations that need them the most. There's not ample supply of anything right now," she said.

Still, she expressed confidence the outbreak can be controlled. "What we need to do right now is focus on stopping the spread. And we can do that. We can do that with the appropriate messaging, with the appropriate testing ... with supportive isolation and clinical care as necessary, with protecting health workers," Van Kerkhove said.

[byline: Helen Branswell]

--
communicated by:
ProMED

[The source of the individual's acquisition of monkeypox (MPX) virus infection is unknown, nor if it is related to the individual's travel to Canada. The locality in Canada is not stated nor is the length of time that the individual was there.

It would be of interest to know the MPX virus clade involved in this case. The West Africa clade is less pathogenic than the Central African clade is. It would also be of interest to know if the MPX virus genome of this case is similar to that of cases in the United Kingdom or Portugal. One hopes that there is no ongoing transmission in Massachusetts or cases emerging in Canada. - Mod.TY

ProMED map:
Jamaica Plain, Boston, Massachusetts, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703351,22340]
See Also
Monkeypox - Europe: Portugal, Spain, UK 20220519.8703349
Monkeypox - UK (03): local transmission 20220518.8703317
Monkeypox - UK (02): ex Nigeria 20220515.8703269
Monkeypox - UK: (England) ex Nigeria 20220508.8703123
2021
---
Monkeypox - USA (03): (MD) ex Nigeria 20211119.8699741
Monkeypox - USA (02): (TX) ex Nigeria 20210723.8538949
Monkeypox - USA: (TX) ex Nigeria 20210717.8524846
.................................................sb/sh/ty/mj/sh
</body>
