<header id=053958>
Published Date: 2003-04-11 19:50:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> SARS - worldwide (42): WHO historical overview
Archive Number: 20030411.0878
</header>
<body id=053958>
SARS - WORLDWIDE (42): WHO HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: 11 Apr 2003
From: ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>
Source: WHO SARS website [edited]
<http://www.who.int/csr/sarsarchive/2003_04_11/en/>

Update 27 - One month into the global SARS outbreak: Status of the
outbreak and lessons for the immediate future 11 Apr 2003
------------------------
Status of the global SARS outbreak and lessons for the immediate future
Current status of the SARS outbreak
At this moment, public health authorities, physicians and scientists around
the world are struggling to cope with a severe and rapidly spreading new
disease in humans, severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS. This appears
to be the first severe and easily transmissible new disease to emerge in
the 21st century. Though much about the disease remains poorly understood,
including the exact identity of the causative virus, we do know that it has
features that allow it to spread rapidly along international air travel routes.
As of 10 Apr 2003, 2781 SARS cases, with 111 deaths, have been reported to
WHO from 17 countries on 3 continents. Some outbreaks have reassuring
features. A high awareness of SARS symptoms among travellers and the
medical and nursing professions has often resulted in good management of
imported cases - prompt isolation of patients and management according to
strict procedures of infection control. As a result, many countries having
only a single or a few imported cases have experienced no further spread to
hospital staff, families of patients and hospital visitors, or the
community at large.
The list of countries and continents reporting suspect or probable SARS
cases will no doubt continue to grow due to heightened global vigilance,
knowledge about symptoms and exposures, and awareness of the need for
immediate isolation of cases and strict infection control. So long as these
measures are followed, the detection of first cases in countries need not
be interpreted as evidence that SARS is continuing to spread. Tabular
information on countries reporting SARS and the cumulative total of cases
and deaths is published each day on the WHO SARS web site.
<http://www.who.int/csr/sarscountry/en/>
"Hot zones" of concern
Despite some positive signs that imported cases are not spreading further,
outbreaks in China, Canada, Hong Kong, Hanoi, and Singapore have taken root
in hospitals and beyond, and give rise to considerable concern. One of the
most alarming features of SARS in these areas is its rapid spread in
hospitals, where it has affected a large number of previously healthy
health care workers. Many require intensive care, placing a huge strain on
hospital facilities and staff. In countries, such as Canada, where cases
occurred before WHO issued its global alert, SARS is continuing to spread
despite the introduction of strict patient isolation and excellent
infection control.
China
On 9 Apr 2003, a WHO investigative team, which had conducted interviews and
studies in Guangdong Province since 3 Apr 2003, presented its interim
report on the SARS outbreak to Chinese authorities. The team concluded that
the health system in Guangdong responded well to the outbreak, but that
health systems in all other provinces had less capacity to cope with the
severity of the challenge posed by SARS. Several recommendations for
improvements were made in the report.
The team also found evidence of "super-spreaders" in Guangdong, including
one who is thought to have infected as many as 100 other persons. The
outbreak is now thought to date back to at least 16 Nov 2002, when an
initial case was reported in Foshan City.
Particular concern centres on the situation in Beijing. Yesterday, WHO
deepened discussions with Beijing health authorities, particularly
concerning the efficiency of systems for case reporting and contact tracing.
Canada
To date, Canada has reported 114 probable cases and 10 deaths. All cases
have occurred in persons who have travelled to Asia or had close contact
with SARS cases in households or health care facilities. Health Canada has
taken several steps to protect the health of Canadians and the travelling
public, and to reduce opportunities of transmitting the virus to others.
Several Canadian schools and hospitals are closed.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong, with 998 cases and 30 deaths, is presently the hardest-hit area.
Health care workers continue to become infected in a growing number of
hospitals. WHO learned this week that the chief executive of the Prince of
Wales Hospital - the initial epicentre of the Hong Kong outbreak - is
hospitalized with atypical pneumonia. Hospitals are becoming overwhelmed. A
decision to suspend all primary, secondary, special schools and
kindergartens until 6 Apr 2003 has been extended up to 21 Apr 2003.
Most disturbing is a large cluster of 268 SARS cases linked to the Amoy
Gardens estate of high-rise apartment buildings. The vast majority of Amoy
Gardens cases have been traced to vertically linked apartments in a single
building, Block E. This pattern of transmission indicates that the disease
has moved out of the health care setting and is now occurring within the
community as secondary cases. Epidemiologists investigating the Amoy
Gardens outbreak are considering the hypothesis that some form of
environmental contamination, perhaps linked to a sewage or ventilation
system, is the source of the large cluster of cases. Although transmission
through the faecal-oral route is being considered as one possibility, no
evidence of airborne transmission has been demonstrated to date. Virus has
not been detected in animals, including cockroaches and rodents.
Yesterday, health authorities in Hong Kong announced that all household
contacts of confirmed SARS patients will be required immediately to confine
themselves at home for up to 10 days. Household contacts can choose between
confinement in their homes and confinement in holiday camps. No visitors
are allowed during the confinement period, and permission to leave homes or
camps will be granted only on exceptional grounds. During the confinement
period, the Hong Kong Department of Health will conduct medical checks to
monitor health, and the police force will conduct compliance checks.
Viet Nam
In Viet Nam, an epidemiologist from the Hanoi WHO office recognized the
first case of SARS on 28 Feb 2003 at a French hospital in Hanoi. The number
of cases increased rapidly but then stabilized on 24 Mar 2003 at 58 cases
and remained stable for 8 consecutive days. As the maximum incubation
period for SARS is thought to be 10 days, the stable number of cases over
this period raised hope that Viet Nam's outbreak had been brought under
control. However, on 3 Apr 2003 a probable SARS case was detected in a
provincial hospital. Though the case could be linked back to the French
hospital, the absence of isolation and rigorous infection control at the
provincial hospital suggests that many hospital staff, patients, and
visitors may have been exposed, thus possibly seeding further waves of
cases. An additional 3 probable cases, known to have had close contacts
with cases, have been reported since 3 Apr 2003.
Singapore
In Singapore, another of the earliest and hardest-hit areas, 126 persons,
including several children under the age of 18 years, have been diagnosed
with SARS. Most disturbing are new and large clusters of suspected SARS
cases among health workers, inpatients, and visitors in 2 interlinked wards
at Singapore General Hospital and in a second hospital, Tan Tok Seng Hospital.
Intense contact tracing and investigation of these clusters increasingly
points to contact with a single Chinese man in his 60s who was treated at
Singapore General Hospital from 5 to 20 Mar 2003 for chronic kidney disease
and diabetes at Singapore General Hospital. WHO epidemiologists, in
collaboration with national authorities, are finding increasing evidence
that the Chinese patient might have been a so-called "super-spreader."
In SARS outbreaks, a "super-spreader" is a source case who has, for as yet
unknown reasons, infected a large number of persons. It remains unknown
whether such "super-spreaders" are persons secreting an exceptionally high
amount of infectious material or whether some other factor, perhaps in the
environment, is working to amplify transmission at some key phase of virus
shedding.
New coronavirus discovered
Through new mechanisms set up by WHO, progress on the research front has
been unprecedented, particularly in the rapid discovery of a new
coronavirus and the rapid development of diagnostic tests. The best
scientists from around the world are working on these problems around the
clock, and in an unprecedented spirit of collaboration against a threat of
as-yet-unknown dimensions. Nonetheless, we still do not have conclusive
proof that the new virus is indeed the cause of SARS. The results of animal
experiments, which are currently being conducted by a laboratory in a WHO
network, will be available soon and may provide the last pieces of evidence
needed for definitive proof that SARS is caused by the newly discovered
coronavirus. Furthermore, the findings will provide additional evidence to
understand the role of metapneumovirus as a possible "helper virus" in
persons co-infected with the new coronavirus.
Diagnostic tests
The development of a diagnostic test has proved more problematic than
hoped. 3 tests are now available and are helping to improve understanding
of how the virus causes disease in humans. However, all 3 tests have
limitations as tools for bringing the SARS outbreak quickly under control.
The ELISA detects antibodies reliably but only from about day 20 after the
onset of clinical symptoms. It therefore cannot be used to detect cases at
an early stage before they have a chance to spread the infection to others.
The second test, an immunofluorescence assay (IFA), detects antibodies
reliably as of day 10 of infection, but is a comparatively slow test that
requires the growth of virus in cell culture.
The presently available PCR molecular test for detection of SARS virus
genetic material is useful in the early stages of infection but produces
many false negatives. This means that many persons who actually carry the
virus may not be detected -- creating a dangerous sense of false security
in relation to a virus that is known to spread easily in close
person-to-person contact.
Present role of tests in diagnosis
A positive test results indicates that a person is, or recently was,
infected with the coronavirus. However, a negative test result does not
guarantee that the person is not infected with the virus.
At present, reporting to WHO of probable SARS cases is based on an
assessment of clinical symptoms, history -- including travel history -- of
possible exposure to an infected person, and distinctive chest X-rays. The
9 countries in the WHO laboratory network, namely Canada, France, Germany,
Japan, Hong Kong SAR, the Netherlands, Singapore, the United Kingdom, and
the United States of America, are beginning to conduct routine laboratory
testing of suspect and probable SARS cases. WHO has posted on its web site
details about the test methodology that allows other countries to perform
tests. However, more work is needed to produce a robust test that is
capable of rapidly and reliably detecting cases at an early stage of infection.
Apart from the dimensions of the SARS outbreak apparent at this date, the
sections below explain why this disease poses a particularly severe threat
to international health, outline the chronology of events as SARS spread
around the world, and discuss lessons based on strengths and weaknesses of
the global response for the immediate future. These lessons are of great
importance.
The SARS response is the roll-out of a global alert and response activity
under the revision of the International Health Regulations, which provide
the legal framework for the surveillance and reporting of infectious
disease and for the use of measures to prevent their international spread.
SARS is showing how the alert and response activity works in practice for a
newly identified disease. It also indicates how the system now in operation
could apply to other highly significant infectious disease events,
including the next influenza pandemic, the next emerging infection, and the
deliberate release of a biological agent in an act of warfare or terrorism.
The scientific community is now contending with an outbreak caused by a new
virus. This creates an extra step in the containment response:
identification and characterization of the causative agent, which then
allows development of a diagnostic test, treatment protocols, and a
scientifically sound basis for recommending control measures. This is a
step that would not be needed should a biological attack occur using a
well-known pathogen such as anthrax or smallpox. The response to an
influenza pandemic would likewise not be dealing with an entirely new and
poorly understood virus.
SARS: a particularly serious threat to international health
Although the last decades of the previous century witnessed the emergence
of several new diseases, SARS needs to be regarded as a particularly
serious threat for several reasons. If the SARS virus maintains its present
pathogenicity and transmissibility, SARS could become the first severe new
disease of the 21st century with global epidemic potential. As such, its
clinical and epidemiological features, though poorly understood, give cause
for particular alarm. With the notable exception of AIDS, most new diseases
that emerged during the last 2 decades of the previous century or
established endemicity in new geographical areas have features that limit
their capacity to pose a major threat to international public health. Many
(avian influenza, Nipah virus, Hendra virus, Hanta virus) failed to
establish efficient human-to-human transmission. Others (_Escherichia coli_
O157:H7, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) depend on food as a vehicle of
transmission. Diseases such as West Nile Fever and Rift Valley Fever that
have spread to new geographical areas require a vector as part of the
transmission cycle and are associated with low mortality, often in
high-risk groups, such as the elderly, the immunocompromised, or persons
with co-morbidity. Still others (_Neisseria meningitidis_ W135, and the
Ebola, Marburg, and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fevers) have strong
geographical foci. Although outbreaks of Ebola haemorrhagic fever have been
associated with case-fatality rates in the range of 53 percent (Uganda) to
88 percent (Democratic Republic of the Congo), person-to-person
transmission requires close physical exposure to infected blood and other
bodily fluids. Moreover, patients suffering from this disease during the
period of high infectivity are visibly very ill and too unwell to travel.
In contrast, SARS is emerging in ways that suggest great potential for
rapid international spread under the favourable conditions created by a
highly mobile, closely interconnected world. Anecdotal data indicate an
incubation period of 2 to 10 days (average 2 to 7 days), allowing the
infectious agent to be transported, unsuspected and undetected, in a
symptomless air traveller from one city in the world to any other city
having an international airport. Person-to-person transmission through
close contact with respiratory secretions has been demonstrated. The
initial symptoms are non-specific and common. The concentration of cases in
previously healthy hospital staff and the proportion of patients requiring
intensive care are particularly alarming. This "21st century" disease could
have other consequences as well. Should SARS continue to spread, the global
economic consequences -- already estimated at around USD 30 billion --
could be great in a closely interconnected and interdependent world.
Chronology of events leading to an unprecedented emergency travel advisory
Severe Acute Pulmonary Syndrome (SARS) was first identified in Viet Nam on
28 Feb 2003, when Dr Carlo Urbani, an epidemiologist from the Hanoi WHO
office, examined a patient with a severe form of pneumonia for which no
etiology could be found. On 10 Mar 2003, 22 hospital workers in Hanoi
French Hospital were ill with a similar acute respiratory syndrome, and by
11 Mar 2003 similar outbreaks had been reported among hospital workers in
Hong Kong.
SARS occurred at a time of heightened surveillance for atypical respiratory
disease. From 10 Feb 2003 the WHO office in Beijing, which reinforced its
staff with 2 epidemiologists, had been working with the government of China
to learn more about an outbreak of atypical respiratory disease that
affected health workers, their families and contacts in Guangdong Province,
with 305 cases and 5 deaths reported from 16 Nov 2002 to 7 Feb 2003. Around
30 percent of cases were reported to occur in health care workers.
Surveillance was heightened further when a 33-year-old man who had
travelled with his family to Fujian Province in China died in Hong Kong on
17 Feb 2003. The next day, Hong Kong authorities announced that avian
influenza A(H5N1) virus, the cause of "bird flu", had been isolated from
both the man and his 9-year-old hospitalized son. Another member of the
family, an 8-year-old daughter, died while in Fujian and was buried there.
On 12 Mar 2003, after an assessment of the situation in Asia with WHO teams
in Hanoi, Hong Kong, and Beijing, a global alert was issued about cases of
severe atypical pneumonia with unknown etiology that appeared to place
health workers at high risk.
2 days later, on 14 Mar 2003, WHO received a report from the government of
Canada that health authorities had taken steps to alert hospital workers,
ambulance services, and public health units across the provinces that there
were 4 cases of atypical pneumonia within a single family in Toronto that
had resulted in 2 deaths. At 02h00 Geneva time on the following day, 15 Mar
2003, the government of Singapore notified WHO, by urgent
telecommunication, of a similar illness in a 32-year-old physician who had
treated hospital workers with a severe respiratory syndrome in Singapore,
including one from the French Hanoi hospital who had self-evacuated to
Singapore. This Singapore physician had travelled to the United States for
a medical conference, and at the end of the conference boarded a return
flight to Singapore in New York. Before departure he had indicated to a
colleague in Singapore by telephone that he had symptoms similar to the
patients he had treated in Singapore. The colleague notified health
authorities. WHO identified the airline and flight, and the physician and
his accompanying family members were removed from the flight at a stopover
in Frankfurt, Germany, where he was immediately isolated and placed under
hospital care, as were his 2 accompanying family members when they
developed fever and respiratory symptoms several days later. As a result of
this prompt action, Germany experienced no further spread linked to the 3
imported cases.
Later in the morning of 15 Mar 2003, with this background and chronology of
events, a decision was made by WHO to increase the level of the global
alert issued on 12 Mar 2003. The decision was based on 5 different but
related factors. First, the etiology, and therefore the potential for
continued spread, of this new disease were not yet known. Second, the
outbreaks appeared to pose a great risk to health workers who managed
patients, and to the family members and other close contacts of patients.
Third, many different antibiotics and antivirals had been tried empirically
and did not seem to have an effect. Fourth, though the numbers were
initially small, a significant percentage of patients (25 of 26 hospital
staff in Hanoi, and 24 of 39 hospital staff in Hong Kong) had rapidly
progressed to respiratory failure, requiring intensive care and causing
some deaths in previously healthy persons. Finally, the disease had moved
out of its initial focus in Asia and appeared to have spread to North
America and Europe.
At this time, the epidemiology of SARS was poorly understood. A virulent
strain of influenza had not been ruled out as a possible cause, even though
transmission patterns were not characteristic for influenza. There was also
some hope that the new disease, like many other new diseases of the recent
past, would fail to maintain efficient person-to-person transmission, or
that it might attenuate with passage and eventually self-contain. Despite
the lack of understanding about the disease, its cause, and future
evolution, the need was great to introduce a series of emergency measures
to contain SARS outbreaks in the affected areas and prevent further
international spread, thus reducing opportunities for the new disease to
establish endemicity. WHO thus decided, on 15 Mar 2003, to issue a rare
emergency travel advisory as a global alert to international travellers,
health care professionals, and health authorities.
The global alert called for increased attention to patients with atypical
pneumonia who fit the following case definition:
- High fever (greater than 38 C)
- One or more respiratory symptoms including cough, shortness of breath,
difficulty breathing
AND
One or more of the following:
- Close contact with a person who has been diagnosed with SARS
- Recent history of travel to areas reporting cases of SARS.
At the same time the global alert recommended no change in patterns of
international travel, but that passengers notify their health authority if
they should develop signs and symptoms as described above and have a
history of travel to areas reporting cases of SARS. Following this alert,
awareness increased immediately, and many potential new outbreaks were
prevented by the prompt isolation and strict management of suspected cases.
By 27 Mar 2003, however, it was evident that international spread of SARS
had continued after the 15 Mar 2003 advisory at 2 of the earliest outbreak
sites, namely Viet Nam and Hong Kong, and that persons on the same
aeroplanes as persons with symptoms consistent with SARS, and sitting in
close proximity to them, had developed signs and symptoms compatible with
SARS. On this date it was decided to recommend new measures related to
international travel, still with the intent of preventing the international
spread of the infectious agent. These recommendations were that
SARS-affected areas, where transmission was known to be occurring in chains
of human-to-human transmission, institute measures to identify
international passengers who had signs, symptoms and history compatible
with SARS, and to recommend that such persons postpone international travel
and seek medical advice. These recommendations were instituted in most of
the affected areas shortly after 27 Mar 2003.
However, concern continued to mount. An urgent investigation of the Amoy
Gardens outbreak in Hong Kong began on 29 Mar 2003, and the following day,
health officials announced that 213 Amoy residents were probable cases of
SARS. This followed an unusual cluster of cases, closely linked in time and
place, among guests and visitors who had stayed on the same floor of a
hotel located in the same district (Kowloon) as Amoy Gardens. By this same
date, 9 business travellers and tourists had returned to Singapore, Beijing
and Taiwan from Hong Kong, either sick or in the incubation period of SARS.
Outbreaks in the hotel and housing estate indicated that SARS was showing
an unusual pattern of transmission in Hong Kong, probably involving an
environmental component, that would place persons at risk outside the
confined health care settings associated with outbreaks in most other
countries. The 9 cases of probable SARS that occurred in Singapore,
Beijing, and Taiwan, and that were associated with travel in Hong Kong,
indicated that the risk of international spread was continuing.
Consultations were made with WHO teams and travel experts. On 2 Apr 2003 a
recommendation for voluntary postponement of all but essential travel was
issued for travellers considering travel to Hong Kong. At the same time,
because the WHO team and government of China had confirmed that the 4-month
long outbreak in Guangdong continued, and that cases fit the case
definition being applied in Viet Nam and Hong Kong; and because
transmission patterns in Guangdong were not yet available, these same
recommendations were made for Guangdong as maximum security against spread
of SARS outside of Guangdong in the absence of complete understanding of
transmission patterns of the outbreak there.
Cases of possible transmission in aeroplanes continue to be reported and
investigated. As recently as 5 Apr 2003, notification of a SARS patient
travelling internationally by sea from Hong Kong to Vladivostak (Russian
Federation) was received, opening a possible second route of international
travel for the virus.
WHO travel recommendations are kept under constant review and will be
amended as more data about the evolution of SARS become available.
Lessons: the value of innovation and international collaboration
The knowledge obtained in the 3-week period since 15 Mar 2003 has been
remarkable. It demonstrates the value of international cooperation on
emerging infections and the importance of early detection and rapid
introduction of emergency measures to prevent further international spread
and help ensure that imported cases are not allowed to cause disease in others.
When WHO began to set up emergency plans on 15 Mar 2003, identification of
the SARS causative agent and the development of a diagnostic test were
given paramount importance in the overall containment strategy. Detection
of the disease in its early stage, confirmation of cases, understanding
modes of transmission, development of protocols for targeted treatment,
vaccine research and development, and implementation of disease-specific
preventive measures would all depend upon swift progress and results in
etiological and diagnostic research. Sound public health measures would
also require understanding of the presence and concentration of the
pathogen in different tissues and secretions, and patterns of excretion
throughout the course of illness and convalescence. So long as the
etiological agent remained unknown, specialists in infectious disease
control would be forced to resort to control tools dating back to the
"Middle Ages" of microbiology: isolation and quarantine.
On 17 Mar 2003, a network of 11 leading laboratories around the world was
set up as a mechanism for expediting identification of the SARS causative
agent. Laboratories were selected on the basis of 3 criteria: outstanding
scientific expertise, facilities at biosafety level III, and capacity to
contribute to the battery of tests and experiments that would be needed to
fulfill Koch's 4 postulates for the identification of an infectious agent
as the cause of a specific disease. The network was set up on the model of
the influenza network and provides another important lesson: models and
systems set up for one health emergency can be rapidly adapted to serve others.
Collaboration is virtual. Members of the network confer in daily
teleconferences coordinated by WHO and use a secure web site to post
electron microscopic pictures of candidate viruses, sequences of genetic
material for virus identification and characterization, descriptions of
experiments, and results. The well-guarded secret techniques that give each
laboratory its competitive edge have been immediately and openly shared
with others. Laboratories also quickly exchange various samples from
patients and postmortem tissues. These arrangements have allowed the
analysis of samples from the same patient simultaneously in several
laboratories specialized in different approaches, with the results shared
in real time. This collaboration has resulted in the identification of the
suspected causative agent, and the development of 3 diagnostic tests, with
unprecedented speed.
Virus isolation continues from patients with SARS, and at the same time
virus has been isolated from tears and faeces. Publications on these
various findings are being prepared by members of this collaborating group,
but the need remains for a highly sensitive and specific PCR test to
diagnose acute infections.
A similar collaborative group on epidemiology, made up of investigators
from all sites with local transmission of SARS, continues to confirm
person-to-person transmission as the major route of transmission. Today,
the group exchanged information about the Hong Kong investigations to
identify a possible environmental source, which might prove useful in
understanding the unusual new cluster of cases in Singapore. Key questions
include the exact points during the course of incubation and infection when
transmission occurs and whether asymptotic cases are also capable of
spreading SARS. These questions must be answered to better evaluate the
extent of spread of SARS, and the success of containment activities.
A third clinical group, which unites 80 clinicians from 13 countries having
SARS cases, has consistently provided anecdotal information about the lack
of efficacy of treatment with specific antibiotics and antivirals, and has
begun to develop systematic clinical trials of Ribaviran at 2 sites. Their
discussions have shed light on features of the disease at presentation,
treatment and progression of the disease, prognostic indicators, and
discharge criteria. No therapy has been shown to demonstrate any particular
effectiveness. The clinicians agreed that a subset of SARS patients,
perhaps 10 percent, decline, usually around day 7, and need mechanical
assistance to breathe. The care of these people is often complicated by the
presence of other diseases. In this group, mortality is high. Age over 40
years also appears to be associated with a more severe form of disease.
Countries have made travel recommendations for their citizens, using the
guidance provided by WHO and other considerations such as feasibility of
medical evacuation of their citizens and their insurance coverage should
they become infected.
On 28 Mar 2003, at the end of the second week of the global response,
China, an initially reluctant partner in the global alert and response at
the start, became a full partner in the 3 working groups that were studying
SARS, and concluded that the outbreaks of SARS elsewhere in Asia were
related to the outbreak in Guangdong Province. The Chinese government has
announced that SARS is being given top priority. A system of alert and
response for all emerging and epidemic-prone diseases is being developed.
Daily electronic reporting of new cases and deaths, by province, has begun.
Equally important, health officials have begun daily televised press
conferences, thus taking the important step of increasing the awareness of
the population and hospital staff of the characteristic symptoms, the need
to seek prompt medical attention, and the need to manage patients according
to the principles of isolation and strict infection control.
The next weeks and months will tell whether the global alert and response
will contain the current SARS outbreaks, preventing SARS from becoming yet
another endemic infectious disease in human populations, or whether SARS
will remain confined to its origins in nature, to re-emerge at yet another
time and place. It is clear that the responsibility for containing the
emergence of any new infectious disease showing international spread lies
on all countries. In a world where all national borders are porous when
confronted by a microbial threat, it is in the interest of all populations
for countries to share the information they may have as soon as it is
available. In so doing, they will allow both near and distant countries --
all neighbours in our globalized world -- to benefit from the understanding
they have gained.
by David L. Heymann
Executive Director, Communicable Diseases, WHO
--
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>
[This is an excellent "historical" overview of the sequence of events over
the past month since the recognition of this outbreak as a major global
concern. While we recognize that most of the information contained in this
posting has appeared in prior postings, the presentation above as a
historical summary merits its posting today.
The mention of the 2 confirmed cases of H5N1 avian influenza in individuals
that had travelled to Fujian province that were identified in February 2003
[see ProMED-mail posting Influenza, H5N1 human case - China (Hong Kong)
20030219.0428] is interesting. In the moderator comment accompanying the
ProMED-mail posting, this moderator said: "On a provocative note, checking
the geography it is noteworthy that Guangdong Province is adjacent to Hong
Kong and Fujian Province is the next northerly province on mainland
China. A rather curious coincidence to have a major respiratory outbreak
in a nearby province (see ProMED-mail postings on Pneumonia - China
(Guangdong) listed below). As a reminder there were approximately 350
cases of pneumonia with 5 deaths reported in Guangdong province."
Revisiting that family outbreak (there were 2 confirmed H5N1 isolates from
the father and son), the daughter's death was undiagnosed, another daughter
was hospitalized with an undiagnosed pneumonia, and the mother's diagnosis
was attributed to "parainfluenza infection" [see ProMED-mail posting
Influenza, H5N1 human case - China (Hong Kong) (04) 20030227.0491]. It
would be interesting to know whether this family had SARS and the H5N1
infections were superinfections/co-infections with the coronavirus now felt
to be responsible for SARS. Results of antibody testing of surviving
family members would be of interest, as would testing of autopsy specimens
from the father if these specimens were still available. Food for thought.
- Mod.MPP]
See Also
SARS - worldwide (41):overview 20030411.0876
SARS worldwide (40):cases 20030410.0875
SARS - worldwide (39):cases 20030410.0873
SARS - worldwide (38): etiology 20030410.0869
SARS - worldwide (37):cases 20030409.0866
SARS - worldwide (36):cases 20030409.0862
SARS - Worldwide (34): etiology 20030408.0857
SARS - worldwide (28): overview 20030403.0822
SARS - worldwide (13): etiology 20030327.0758
SARS - worldwide (10): infectious disease perspectives 20030326.0752
SARS - worldwide (04): etiology 20030325.0737
Severe acute respiratory syndrome - worldwide (17) 20030322.0713
Severe acute respiratory syndrome - Worldwide: alert (03) 20030316.0660
Severe acute respiratory syndrome - Worldwide (02):alert 20030315.0649
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome - Worldwide 20030315.0637
Acute respiratory syndrome - Canada (Ontario) 20030314.0631
Acute respiratory syndrome - East Asia 20030314.0630
Acute respiratory syndrome - China (HK), VietNam (03) 20030313.0624
Undiagnosed illness - Vietnam (Hanoi): RFI 20030311.0595
Influenza, H5N1 human case - China (Hong Kong) 20030219.0428
Influenza, H5N1 human case - China (Hong Kong) (04) 20030227.0491
Pneumonia - China (Guangdong) (07) 20030221.0452
Pneumonia - China (Guangdong): RFI 20030210.0357
..........................mpp/cp/pg/mpp

*##########################################################*
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org
(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-majordomo@promedmail.org.
############################################################
############################################################
</body>
