<header id=045983>
Published Date: 2019-12-21 06:42:11 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Vaping-related illness - North America (08): USA, CDC update
Archive Number: 20191221.6851991
</header>
<body id=045983>
VAPING-RELATED ILLNESS - NORTH AMERICA (08): USA, CDC UPDATE
************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 19 Dec 2019
Source: CDC [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2019/s1220-states-update-evali-cases.html


The CDC today [19 Dec 2019] announced the updated number of hospitalized e-cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury (EVALI) cases* and EVALI deaths.

Hospitalized EVALI cases: As of 17 Dec 2019, 2506 cases of hospitalized EVALI were reported by all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and 2 US territories (Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands).

EVALI deaths: As of 1 Dec 2019, 54 deaths have been confirmed in 27 states and the District of Columbia: Alabama, California, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and Virginia.

More deaths are under investigation.

*As of 3 Dec 2019, the CDC will report only hospitalized EVALI cases and EVALI deaths, regardless of hospitalization status.

For updates on this investigation, visit <www.cdc.gov/lunginjury>.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 20 Dec 2019
Source: CDC [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2019/p1220-cases-EVALI.html


Today [20 Dec 2019], the CDC released 4 reports on the ongoing EVALI outbreak. Key findings, published in Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) and the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM), confirm a decline in emergency department (ED) visits related to EVALI.

The findings also reinforce the link between Vitamin E acetate and EVALI and describe risk factors for EVALI rehospitalizations and deaths after hospital discharge; as such, the CDC recommends that healthcare providers treating EVALI patients provide follow-up soon after hospital discharge.

The 1st NEJM report found ED visits for EVALI rose sharply beginning in June 2019, peaking in September 2019. Since then, ED visits for EVALI have declined; however, ED visits remain higher than when the outbreak began in June 2019.

The 2nd NEJM report strengthens prior CDC and US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) findings on the link between Vitamin E acetate and EVALI. Building upon a previous study, the CDC analyzed bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid from a larger number of EVALI patients from 16 states and compared [it with] BAL fluid from healthy people. Vitamin E acetate, also found in product samples tested by the FDA and state laboratories, was identified in BAL fluid from 48 of 51 EVALI patients and was not found in any of the BAL fluids of healthy people.

The CDC also released a study in the MMWR comparing EVALI patients who were rehospitalized, or who later died after hospital discharge, with other EVALI patients. Among the 2409 US EVALI cases reported to the CDC as of 10 Dec 2019, 31 patients were hospitalized and 7 died after hospital discharge. Among these patients, the median time to rehospitalization was 4 days and the median time to death after hospital discharge was 3 days.

EVALI patients requiring rehospitalization were more likely than other EVALI patients to have a history of chronic conditions such as heart disease, respiratory conditions, and diabetes. In addition, EVALI patients who died after hospital discharge were more likely to be 50 years or older.

"It is important physicians and clinical providers work with EVALI patients to ensure follow-up care within 2 days," said CDC Director Robert R. Redfield, MD. "A follow-up visit with a primary care physician is especially important for EVALI patients with underlying chronic conditions. Ensuring this timely medical attention and monitoring can save lives."

These findings have led the CDC to update its clinical guidance in a 2nd MMWR article. The guidance recommends patients be clinically stable before discharge and have a follow-up with a clinical provider within 48 hours of hospital discharge -- a shorter follow-up time than the previous recommendation of 1-2 weeks. This report also provides tools for clinicians, including an updated algorithm for management of patients with suspected EVALI, a fact sheet for clinicians, and an EVALI Discharge Readiness Checklist.

Current recommendations from the CDC and FDA
--------------------------------------------
The CDC and the FDA recommend people not use THC-containing e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly from informal sources like friends, family, or in-person or online sellers.

Vitamin E acetate should not be added to e-cigarette, or vaping, products. Additionally, people should not add any other substances not intended by the manufacturer to products, including products purchased through retail establishments.

While it appears Vitamin E acetate is associated with EVALI, there are many different substances and product sources being investigated, and there may be more than one cause. Therefore, the best way for people to ensure they are not at risk while the investigation continues is to consider refraining from the use of all e-cigarette, or vaping, products.

Adults using e-cigarettes or vaping products as an alternative to cigarettes should not go back to smoking; they should weigh all available information and consider using FDA-approved cessation medications. They should contact their healthcare provider if they need help quitting tobacco products, including e-cigarettes.

Adults who continue to use e-cigarette, or vaping, products, should carefully monitor themselves for symptoms and see a healthcare provider immediately if they develop symptoms like those reported in this outbreak.

Regardless of the ongoing investigation:
- E-cigarette, or vaping, products should never be used by youths, young adults, or women who are pregnant.
- Adults who do not currently use tobacco products should not start using e-cigarette, or vaping, products. There is no safe tobacco product. All tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, carry a risk.
- THC use has been associated with a wide range of health effects, particularly with prolonged and frequent use. The best way to avoid potentially harmful effects is to not use THC-containing e-cigarette or vaping products.
- People with ongoing problematic marijuana use that causes significant impairment or distress should seek evidence-based treatment by a healthcare provider.

The CDC will continue to update guidance, as appropriate, as new data become available from this complex outbreak.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Fri 20 Dec 2019
Sources: CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) [edited]
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm685152e1.htm?s_cid=mm685152e1_w; https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/pdfs/mm685152e1-H.pdf


Citation: Mikosz CA, Danielson M, Anderson KN, et al. Characteristics of patients experiencing rehospitalization or death after hospital discharge in a nationwide outbreak of e-cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury -- United States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub 20 Dec 2019. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm685152e1

Summary
-------
What is already known about this topic?
Some patients hospitalized for e-cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury (EVALI) have been rehospitalized or have died after hospital discharge.

What is added by this report?
Compared with other EVALI patients, rehospitalized patients and patients who died after hospital discharge were more likely to have one or more chronic conditions, including cardiac disease, chronic pulmonary disease, and diabetes, and to be older. At least one-quarter of rehospitalizations and deaths occurred within 2 days after discharge.

What are the implications for public health practice?
Intensive discharge planning, ensuring clinical stability before discharge, optimized case management, and follow-up optimally within 48 hours after hospital discharge might minimize EVALI patients' risk for rehospitalization and death, especially among patients with chronic conditions.

The CDC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), state and local health departments, and public health and clinical stakeholders continue to investigate a nationwide outbreak of e-cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury (EVALI) (1-4). Characterizing EVALI patients who experience rehospitalization or death after hospital discharge might identify risk factors for higher morbidity and mortality. The CDC analyzed national data on EVALI patients to determine the prevalence of rehospitalization and death after discharge and to identify characteristics associated with EVALI patients who require rehospitalization and those who die after discharge, compared with other EVALI patients. As of 10 Dec 2019, a total of 2409 EVALI cases requiring hospitalization have been reported to the CDC, as have 52 deaths. Among the 1139 EVALI patients discharged on or before 31 Oct 2019, 31 (2.7%) were rehospitalized after discharge, with a median of 4 days (interquartile range [IQR], 2-20 days) between discharge and rehospitalization; 7 deaths (13.5% of EVALI deaths) occurred after discharge, with a median of 3 days (IQR, 2-13 days) between discharge and death. Characteristics of EVALI patients who were rehospitalized or died after hospital discharge suggest that chronic medical conditions, including cardiac disease, chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] and obstructive sleep apnea), and diabetes, are risk factors leading to higher morbidity and mortality among some EVALI patients. For example, 70.6% of patients who were rehospitalized and 83.3% of those who died had one or more chronic conditions, compared with 25.6% of those who were neither rehospitalized nor died. In addition, EVALI patients who were rehospitalized or died after discharge were older: The median ages of patients who died, were rehospitalized, and who neither died nor were rehospitalized were 54, 27, and 23 years, respectively. EVALI patient follow-up optimally within 48 hours after hospital discharge might minimize risk for rehospitalization and death, especially among patients with chronic conditions. In addition, interventions for EVALI patients, including intensive hospital discharge planning and optimized case management, might minimize risks for morbidity and mortality after a hospital discharge (5).

The CDC partnered with state health departments and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists Vaping Associated Pulmonary Illness Task Force to develop and disseminate EVALI surveillance case definitions (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/assets/2019-Lung-Injury-Surveillance-Case-Definition-508.pdf) and data collection tools (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/healthcare-providers/pdfs/National-Case-Report-Form-v01.pdf) beginning in August 2019. States and jurisdictions voluntarily report data on confirmed and probable hospitalized or deceased EVALI patients to the CDC weekly. States might also include available data from medical record abstractions and interviews of patients, or proxies (e.g., spouses or parents) if patients were too ill or had died.

This report compares clinical characteristics of EVALI patients who were rehospitalized or died after hospital discharge with those of patients who were neither rehospitalized nor died after hospital discharge, among cases reported to the CDC by 10 Dec 2019. Rehospitalized patients were defined as those who had a 2nd hospitalization, regardless of reason for admission, that occurred one or more days after the date of discharge from the 1st hospitalization. A death after hospital discharge was defined as death, regardless of reason for death, that occurred one or more days after the date of last hospital discharge. Rehospitalized patients and those who died after discharge were compared separately with hospitalized EVALI patients who met the following criteria: 1) an initial hospital discharge date on or before 31 Oct 2019, to allow time for the 2 outcomes of interest to potentially occur; 2) no reports of rehospitalization or death as of 10 Dec 2019; and 3) available data for at least one variable in all of the following categories: medical history, EVALI symptoms reported, and clinical course of EVALI illness. Percentages and distributions of categorical and continuous indicators were compared using Fisher's exact tests and Kruskal-Wallis tests, respectively; P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant for pair-wise comparisons between 1) the comparison group and patients who were rehospitalized or 2) the comparison group and those who died after discharge. To assess the impact of multiple comorbidities on rehospitalization or death after discharge among EVALI patients, the additive effect of several specific chronic conditions was studied; chronic conditions included for this comorbidity analysis were cardiac disease; asthma; obstructive sleep apnea; COPD; other respiratory conditions not including asthma, obstructive sleep apnea, or COPD (e.g., interstitial lung disease); and diabetes. The IQR was included where median values were reported. All analyses were conducted using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute).

As of 10 Dec 2019, a total of 2409 EVALI cases requiring hospitalization have been reported to the CDC, as have 52 deaths. Among the 1139 EVALI patients discharged on or before 31 Oct 2019, 31 (2.7%) were rehospitalized after discharge without subsequent report of death. An additional 7 deaths (13.5% of EVALI deaths) occurred after hospital discharge. The comparison group included 768 EVALI patients who met the inclusion criteria. The age distributions differed among EVALI patients who were rehospitalized, who died after discharge, and who were neither rehospitalized nor died (Table 1; see source URL). The median ages of patients who died, were rehospitalized, and who neither died nor were rehospitalized were 54, 27, and 23 years, respectively. Among deaths after discharge, 5 (71.4%) occurred among females, although females accounted for 33.6% of comparison cases.

EVALI patients who were rehospitalized or died after hospital discharge had more chronic medical conditions. For example, 70.6% and 17.6% of patients who were rehospitalized had at least one or at least 2 chronic conditions, respectively, and 83.3% and 50.0% of those who died had at least one or at least 2 chronic conditions, respectively, compared with 25.6% and 3.8%, respectively, of those who were neither rehospitalized nor died (P less than 0.05) (Table 1; see source URL).

Neither symptoms reported when initially seeking medical care nor the location of this initial care [was] associated with rehospitalization or death after discharge (Table 2; see source URL). All patients who died after hospital discharge had been admitted to an intensive care unit during their previous hospitalization (P equals 0.006) compared with 41.9% of the comparison group and 47.4% of the surviving rehospitalized patients (Table 3; see source URL). Respiratory failure necessitating intubation and mechanical ventilation during initial hospitalization was more common among patients who died (100%) than among patients who were neither rehospitalized nor died (15.6%) (P equals 0.03). No significant difference among the 3 groups with respect to receipt of corticosteroid therapy or antibiotic therapy during initial hospitalization was observed. Duration of initial hospitalization did not differ among the 3 groups. Among rehospitalized patients, a median of 4 days (IQR, 2-20) elapsed between discharge from the 1st hospitalization and rehospitalization. Among patients who died after discharge, a median of 3 days (IQR, 2-13) elapsed between hospital discharge and death.

Discussion
----------
As of 10 Dec 2019, 2.7% of EVALI patients reported to the CDC have required rehospitalization, and approximately one in 7 deaths among EVALI patients has occurred after discharge. Compared with other hospitalized EVALI patients, the prevalence of one or more chronic conditions was higher among those who required rehospitalization and those who died after discharge. EVALI patients who died also were more likely to have been admitted to an intensive care unit, experienced respiratory failure necessitating intubation and mechanical ventilation, and were significantly older. EVALI patients with chronic comorbidities and these initial hospitalization characteristics might require a higher threshold for hospital discharge and focused efforts during discharge planning and transition to the outpatient setting, such as intensive case management and rapid follow-up (5).

At least one-quarter of rehospitalizations occurred within 2 days of initial discharge, which suggests that ensuring clinical stability before discharge as well as postdischarge follow-up optimally within 48 hours might minimize risk for rehospitalization and death, especially among patients with chronic conditions (5). A higher frequency of rehospitalizations among EVALI patients after a longer interval has been reported elsewhere (6); differences observed in the current study might reflect its larger study population and wider geographic distribution of EVALI cases. Concurrent with this report, the CDC is publishing additional clinical guidance for discharge planning for EVALI patients (5).

The findings in this report are subject to at least 7 limitations. First, the limited proportion of reported cases with detailed clinical data might limit generalizability. Second, the small number of rehospitalizations and deaths after discharge limit the ability to identify significant differences and assess confounding factors. Third, EVALI patients in the comparison group might not fully represent a cohort at lower risk; some patients might still be rehospitalized or die. However, limiting comparison cases to those patients discharged on or before 31 Oct 2019 was intended to mitigate this effect. Fourth, reported data do not include the reason for rehospitalization or death after hospital discharge of EVALI patients; rehospitalization or death was possibly not related to EVALI, especially among patients with multiple comorbidities. Fifth, use of e-cigarette, or vaping, products, as well as compliance with recommended postdischarge treatment, was not assessed. Sixth, available data might represent an underestimation of rehospitalized EVALI patients. These data might not be as rigorously reported as those concerning patients initially seeking care; there might have been variability in how states defined rehospitalization, or both. Finally, data on insurance status were not collected, so the relationship between EVALI outcomes and insurance status, prescription medication coverage, and access to care in the inpatient and outpatient settings could not be assessed.

Among EVALI patients, careful and comprehensive discharge planning, ensuring clinical stability before discharge, follow-up optimally within 48 hours after hospital discharge, and enhanced efforts to coordinate care and address comorbidities might minimize risk for rehospitalizations or death after discharge (5). The latest national and state data from patient reports and product sample testing suggest tetrahydrocannabinol-containing e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly from informal sources such as friends, family members, or in-person or online dealers, are linked to most of the cases and play a major role in the outbreak (1,7,8). Thus, the CDC and FDA recommend that persons not use tetrahydrocannabinol-containing e-cigarette, or vaping, products, particularly from informal sources. Vitamin E acetate, found in product samples tested by the FDA and state laboratories, has also been found in patient lung fluid specimens from a number of geographically diverse states tested by the CDC (9). However, evidence is not yet sufficient to rule out the contribution of other chemicals of concern. While it appears that vitamin E acetate is associated with EVALI, there are many different substances and product sources that are being investigated, and there may be more than one cause. Therefore, the best way for persons to ensure that they are not at risk while the investigation continues is to consider refraining from the use of all e-cigarette, or vaping, products. Adults who continue to use e-cigarette, or vaping, products should carefully monitor themselves for symptoms and see a healthcare provider immediately if they develop symptoms similar to those reported in this outbreak (5,10). Irrespective of the ongoing investigation, e-cigarette, or vaping, products should never be used by youths, young adults, or pregnant women. Adults using e-cigarette, or vaping, products as an alternative to cigarettes should not go back to smoking; they should weigh all available information and consider using FDA-approved cessation medications (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html?s_cid).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A list of references for article 3 may be found in the MMWR at the website source listed above.

Key messages from these articles appear to be discharged patients may regress to critical or deadly situations within 24-48 hours posthospitalization discharge. Vaping of vitamin E acetate and/or THC appears to be a major contributor to the EVALI situation.

It is good news the number of cases and deaths seems to be decreasing as people become more aware of the situation.

It is likely there will be some regulations concerning what may be added to vaping fluids in an attempt to prevent a repeat of this entire situation. The EVALI situation has diminished but, unfortunately, not completely stopped. We are saddened for those who have had deaths among their families or friends. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6851991,106]
See Also
Vaping-related illness - North America (07): USA, CDC update 20191207.6828728
Vaping-related illness - North America (07): USA, CDC update 20191207.6828728
Vaping-related illness - North America (06): USA, toxic metals 20191206.6825898
Vaping-related illness - North America (05): Canada, flavoring, lung disease 20191123.6794630
Vaping related illness - Europe: (Belgium) fatal 20191115.6779589
Vaping-related illness - North America (04): USA, vitamin E & THC 20191110.6771539
Vaping-related illness - North America (03): USA, update 20191102.6758511
Vaping-related illness - North America (02): USA, update 20191004.6708832
Vaping-related illness - North America (01): Canada, USA, CDC updates 20190928.6699608
Vaping-related illness - USA (05): update 20190927.6696977
Vaping-related illness - USA (04): (KS) deaths 20190925.6692937
Vaping-related illness - USA (03): deaths, CDC 20190919.6682101
Vaping-related illness - USA (02): flavoring ban 20190913.6671715
Vaping-related illness - USA: oil, contaminant suspected, fatal 20190907.6661874
2018
----
Vaping solution ingestion - UK (Scotland): serious toxicity 20181216.6211738
.................................................tg/rd/lm
</body>
