<header id=011310>
Published Date: 2020-07-17 01:34:26 EDT
Subject: PRO/ALL> Obituary: Dr Donald Kaye, ProMED-mail associate editor
Archive Number: 20200717.7567754
</header>
<body id=011310>
OBITUARY: DR DONALD KAYE, PROMED-MAIL ASSOCIATE EDITOR
******************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Mon 13 Jul 2020
Source: Healio Infectious Disease News [edited]
https://www.healio.com/news/infectious-disease/20200713/donald-kaye-infectious-disease-news-editorial-board-member-and-mentor-to-many-dies-at-88


Donald Kaye, MD, MACP, an influential infectious diseases clinician and researcher and longtime Infectious Disease News editorial board member, died 4 Jul 2020 at the age of 88, his family announced.

Kaye authored the informative and widely read "Eye on ID" column for Infectious Disease News since 2013 and had been a professor of medicine at Drexel University College of Medicine, an associate editor for ProMED-mail, and news section editor for Clinical Infectious Diseases.

"We are so saddened to hear that our colleague Donald Kaye is no longer with us. His leadership in infectious diseases is legendary and he -- and his sons! -- have contributed much to the success of Infectious Disease News and to all the patients of our readers, who have benefited from Donald's deep expertise," said Infectious Disease News chief medical editor Paul A. Volberding, MD. "We wish his family the best in this hard and sad time."

Kaye was born on 12 Aug 1931 in New York City and graduated from Yale in 1953. He earned his MD from New York University in 1957 and completed his training in internal medicine and infectious diseases at Cornell University and New York Hospital in 1961. While a faculty member at Cornell, he trained and influenced future luminaries in infectious diseases, including Gerald Mandell, Merle Sande, and Anthony Fauci, according to his obituary.

"He meant the world to me in so many ways and was a mentor for decades, even up until the final few months of his storied life," said Larry M Bush, MD, FACP, who co-authored numerous "Eye on ID" articles with Kaye. "The number of notable infectious diseases physicians he educated and influenced in one way or another is countless, and through us he has touched so many other training physicians and patients unknown to him."

"Eye on ID" was wide-ranging in its scope. Recent editions focused on typhoid fever, tularemia, botulism, polio, eastern equine encephalitis, antibiotic prescribing dogma, and babesiosis. A 2014 "Eye on ID" that Kaye co-authored with Marjorie P Pollack, MD, compared the coronaviruses that cause MERS and SARS. It drew renewed attention online recently during the COVID-19 pandemic, becoming one of the most-read stories on Healio.com.

Kaye remained active, editing and publishing right up until the end of his life, his family said. He was the sole author of the most recent "Eye on ID," writing about the life cycle of _Trichinella spiralis_ and the symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of trichinellosis. The article will be published later this month [July 2020].

"Over the years, Dr Kaye pushed me to become a better medical news editor. I continually learned new things from him; above all, he taught me how important a cognitive specialty like infectious diseases is to the betterment of public health," said John C Schoen, MA, Healio editorial director and former executive editor of Infectious Disease News. "He was exceptionally knowledgeable and insightful, and his impact on Healio and Infectious Disease News cannot be overstated."

In 1969, Kaye became chairman of the department of medicine at the Medical College of Pennsylvania (MCP), subsequently Hahnemann, at age 38 years, a position that he maintained until 1995. During his time at MCP, he transformed the department into a nationally recognized research and clinical institution. He was an internationally recognized clinician, educator, and researcher, with particular expertise in UTIs and endocarditis, writing books on these topics.

Kaye published more than 250 peer-reviewed articles in medical journals and authored more than 100 book chapters. He received many federally funded grants and numerous awards, was elected to leadership positions in professional societies, and was named Master of the American College of Physicians. He served on editorial boards for many professional journals and was a mentor to hundreds of physicians, in whom he instilled the values of integrity, loyalty, and compassion, his family said.

Kaye married the love of his life, Janet Kaye (nee Sovitsky), in 1954 and had 4 children, all of whom are physicians. He was a grandfather to 9 grandchildren.

In lieu of flowers, the family said contributions in his memory may be made to Main Line Reform Temple in Wynnewood, Pennsylvania (<www.mlrt.org>).

A message from Keith S Kaye, MD, MPH:
My dad had a huge influence on my career and choice of career in infectious diseases. For me, it was really almost subconscious. I really tried to consider other specialties, but I always came back to infectious diseases due to my love of the cognitive challenges and the detective work that clinical cases often presented, trying to identify sources of fever, types of infection, or alternative diagnoses. I don't know if it was from environment or genetics or a combination of both, but he instilled in me the curiosity and passion for infectious diseases. He set an incredible standard and example for me to follow with regards to not only being a top-notch clinician, mentor, researcher, and educator, but also in terms of how to treat other people -- patients, families of patients, colleagues, mentees, and other healthcare workers. He always treated everyone with the utmost respect. He would not leave the office until he returned every phone call he had received that day. He had a unique set of values and high standards, not only for himself, but also for others. He set those standards for others as a role model, trying to make them better clinicians, investigators, and people.

My dad was a mentor to literally hundreds of physicians. I was really blessed to have him as my prime mentor professionally. He was not only my father, but also a world-renowned infectious diseases physician and master clinician with a longtime administrative role and a highly successful research career. Having him as a father and a professional mentor almost felt unfair to peers in my generation, but I never hesitated to take full advantage of his wisdom and guidance. I also learned from him how important it is to give back and support trainees and junior faculty, and, as a result, I consider mentoring one of my most important activities.

I also learned from my dad the value and importance of family; the one thing more important than his work was family. He instilled in his children and grandchildren the importance of honesty, a strong work ethic, generosity, and family values. Whether at home or in the workplace, they truly don't make them like Donald Kaye anymore.

A message from Kenneth M Kaye, MD:
My dad loved infectious diseases and medicine in general. He experienced true joy and excitement in what he did. His areas of expertise were endocarditis and UTIs, but he also had a special affinity for parasitology. He would have an almost childlike joy deciphering challenging clinical cases. He always had work in front of him. It didn't matter if he was down at the beach on vacation or if I were driving the car, he always had a pile of manuscripts and journals in his hand.

Growing up, infectious diseases was a family affair. For example, when I was an infant, I contracted salmonella, and they tracked it down to a parakeet we had in the house. They wrote it up -- they wrote me up -- in The New England Journal of Medicine. When I was 4 years old, when my dad was at Cornell and New York Hospital, we spent a year in Brazil, and he helped them set up an exchange program. When we moved to Philadelphia, he continued that exchange program at the Medical College of Pennsylvania, and that went on for many years. Also, as a young child, we all knew about naegleria, and how to avoid it when we went swimming in the lake each summer. My dad imbued his love of medicine in his 4 children. My brother-in-law, who is also in infectious diseases, my brother, father, and I co-taught an annual CME infectious diseases course every December, which spanned several decades. Though my father loved his work, family always came first, despite his busy schedule. He would come to all our school events, whether it was music concerts or sporting events. And, of course, the sporting events were in the middle of the afternoon, which I'm sure were difficult for him to get to.

He also was a clinical master. In weekly professor's rounds, his residents would try to stump him with difficult cases. No matter what patient they would muster up, he would make the diagnosis. Someone told me that he had once made a very difficult diagnosis of vasculitis in a patient by looking at their eye grounds. He taught his grandson -- my son, who is just starting his medical internship -- the proper way to check blood pressure. He had tremendous respect for the physical exam, and he lamented its diminishing role in medicine.

Another theme with my dad was mentoring. He was very old-school and felt that mentoring was really important, and he heavily invested himself in it. He prided himself in finding and even creating opportunities for residents, fellows, and colleagues that could be pivotal for their careers. His mentoring extended to his family and friends, who could count on him for his sage advice.

With a true love of infectious diseases and medicine, he remained actively engaged, right up until the end of his life. Some of his writing for Infectious Disease News is still in press. He was also the news editor for Clinical Infectious Diseases, and a number of his columns for that publication are still in press as well. My dad was also an editor and moderator at ProMED, where Marjorie Pollack, he, and others were involved in the 1st report of COVID-19, last December [2019]. My father appreciated his life, which was full of family and a rewarding career. In his final days, he expressed that he had no regrets, and no bucket list. That being said, he will be greatly missed.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Mon 13 Jul 2020
From: Matt Levison [edited]


Donald Kaye was an exceptional person. I was very fortunate to have been his fellow in infectious diseases at Cornell-New York Hospital from 1967-69. At 36 years of age, he was already known throughout New York City as being the smartest clinician around, but also as "very tough". He would accept nothing short of excellence. Although Don's interests at that time involved urinary tract infections and endocarditis, he wanted me to become an expert in anaerobic infections, because that expertise was not represented at Cornell at the time. I was initially intimidated but thrived in this environment, with colleagues who became luminaries in infectious diseases, such as Edward Hook, who was chief of the ID division at Cornell at the time and went on to become chair of medicine at the University of Virginia, along with co-fellows Gerald Mandell and Warren Johnson, and medical residents Merle Sande and Anthony Fauci, and medical student John Gallin. Mandell went on to become chief of the ID division at the University of Virginia and to co-edit the renowned eponymous textbook in infectious diseases; Warren Johnson became chief of the Cornell ID division; Sande became chief of medicine at San Francisco General Hospital at the height of the HIV/AIDS epidemic; Gallin became the scientific director of the NIH Clinical Center; and Fauci became the best known ID physician in the country and the long-time director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

When the fellowship ended, I went into private practice of ID, mistakenly thinking that was to be my future. Don thought otherwise; he wanted me to join him when he became chief of the department of medicine at the Medical College of Pennsylvania (MCP) in Philadelphia. He was persuasive, and my wife, Sandra, a nephrologist, and I spent the next 35-plus years working for him, Sandra as chief of the division of Nephrology and Hypertension and me as chief of the ID division. Under Don's influence, MCP's internal medicine residency and subspecialty fellowships flourished to become much-sought-after training programs.

Don's earlier collaboration at Cornell with Dr Heonir Rocha from Bahia, Brazil, led to the development of an exchange program in medicine with the Universidade Federal de Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. This joint program between MCP and Bahia flourished, exchanging many medical students, residents, and ID fellows over the years. Marjorie Pollack (ProMED-mail's deputy editor) was first of them. Don had learned Portuguese, having lived in Bahia with his family when he was in training. Dr Rocha was a Brazilian ID physician and investigator who had been Dr Paul Beeson's fellow at Yale. Thanks to our association with Don, Sandra and I were fortunate to have been mentored by Dr Rocha, who knew how to ask just the right research questions.

Sandra reminded me of her early collaboration with Don, which resulted in several papers including her 1st JCI paper, "co-authored" with Don. In fact, he was so visible a mentor to Sandra that in her early career, many thought she was an ID physician rather than a nephrologist. Don supported good ideas as well as talented people: Marjorie Pollack was an MCP student and is now deputy editor of ProMED-mail. Allan Tunkel and Clifford Hudis were medical residents and chief residents at MCP. Tunkel is the current dean at Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, and Hudis went from being the chief of the Breast Medicine Service at Memorial Sloane Kettering to CEO of ASCO, the American Society of Clinical Oncology. Several of our ID fellows went on to academic prominence: Jack Sobel was dean at Wayne State University, School of Medicine; Marla Gold is the former dean of Drexel University's School of Public Health and now vice provost for Community Health Care Innovation; Jerome Santoro and Larry Livornese are the former and current chiefs of medicine, respectively, at Lankenau Hospital, Philadelphia; Mark Ingerman is chief of the ID division at Lankenau Hospital; Larry Bush diagnosed anthrax meningitis in a Florida patient and was the first to alert health authorities to the 2001 bioterrorism anthrax attack; he is now president of the Palm Beach County Medical Society and on the medical faculties of Florida Atlantic University and University of Miami; Jaime Carrizosa is associate prof. medicine, University of Central Florida, College of Medicine in Orlando; Lourdes Corman was chief of the division of internal medicine, University of Alabama, Huntsville; and Kris Ries, a leader in HIV/AIDS care, professor emerita, and honorary degree recipient at the University of Utah, School of Medicine, stars in the movie "Quiet Heroes," the story of one doctor's fight against stigma, shame, and ignorance through the height of the HIV/AIDS crisis in Salt Lake City. All came under the influence of Donald Kaye. I apologize for this incomplete listing; the number of distinguished graduates of MCP training programs is long.

Don also helped make the transition of the Woman's Medical College to the Medical College of Pennsylvania and the admission and integration of male medical students to the previous all-women's school. A powerful negotiator, Don was sensitive and respected the previous culture and worked with faculty and alumnae to make this important milestone a smooth progression for the department of medicine and the school, and in the process, the department and the school moved forward with powerful research, clinical, and educational programs.

When Sandra received the 1st federally funded grant to develop a Women's Health medical curriculum, Don found a place for the 1st Women's Health Education program in the Department of Medicine, providing space and faculty appointments for the staff, before the Institute of Women's Health was created.

Don took great pride in being an expert parasitologist, having studied under Ben Kean at Cornell, where the 1st travel health/tropical medicine clinic was founded; we then established the 2nd travel health/tropical medicine clinic at MCP.

Don was an enthusiastic member of "The Interplanetary Society", also known as the "Pus Club", made up of trainees of Paul B Beeson (Yale), Walsh McDermott (Cornell), and W Barry Wood (Johns Hopkins). Several periodic meetings, where research ideas were exchanged, were held at Oxford University, hosted by Paul Beeson, who at the time was Nuffield Professor and chair of medicine at Oxford; at University of Virginia, hosted by Ed Hook and Gerry Mandell; and at MCP, hosted by Don and me.

We lived in the best of times in academic medicine. I was involved in the ID research lab, writing journal articles and textbook chapters, teaching and learning from wonderful students, residents, ID fellows, and other faculty, collaborating with outstanding colleagues throughout the US and internationally, as well as caring for and learning from innumerable patients. All this is thanks to Don, who was my mentor in all these activities.

Don and his wife, Janet, were also always available as friends and colleagues 24/7. He and his father, Morris, were even my consultants when we went house hunting and, once we bought one, Don was eager to teach me how to solve painting, plumbing, and electrical problems. When I retired, he was worried that I would lose my mind if it were not kept active and persuaded me to join him and Marjorie Pollack at ProMED-mail, which I fortunately did and am grateful for. Don provided similar opportunities for numerous others, to their benefit and gratitude, as they acknowledged at his funeral and in subsequent communications. He will be sorely missed, but respectfully and lovingly remembered.

--
Matt Levison, MD
associate editor
ProMED-mail
<matt@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Sun 12 Jul 2020
From: Marjorie Pollack [edited]


As a ProMED-mail colleague and a (very) long-term mentee of Don's, I will greatly miss him. Don was a very special person. I started at the Medical College of Pennsylvania (MCP) shortly after he arrived as one of the youngest chiefs of medicine in all USA medical schools' history. Don was already a larger-than-life figure. By the time he was at MCP (note, age 38), he was already known as a world authority on urinary tract infections and bacterial endocarditis. But, as mentioned by his family above, his family was always number 1. I remember his 4 children coming to visit their dad at MCP periodically and the important role his wife, Janet, played throughout his life. So while he may have seemed like a grizzly bear at times, there really was a teddy bear underneath.

I was very lucky to have Don as my advisor while at MCP. I expressed an interest in doing a tropical medicine elective in India and asked Don if he had contacts there that I might reach out to. Don said no, but then mentioned he wanted to start an exchange program with the University of Bahia Medical School (Universidade Federal da Bahia) in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, and would I be interested in being a guinea pig and going there as the 1st student sent from MCP? That wonderful experience shaped my entire professional career. Don insisted the best period to be there was January through April. He and Janet came to Bahia while I was there, checking on how things were going both professionally as well as personally (making sure I had an excellent time during Carnival, his reason for suggesting those dates for my time there). As a wonderful mentor, Don followed my post-MCP career, so when I was at CDC (the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), he contacted me for advice in setting up a travel medicine clinic, wanting the latest information and recommendations from CDC.

When Don joined us at ProMED-mail as an associate editor, the mentor would come to his mentee for advice related to ProMED-mail and the topics I covered. What an honor for a mentee to have a mentor ask advice! But that being said, he still resumed being a mentor with excellent suggestions and advice, including inviting me to co-author editorials for the Infectious Disease Newsletter. But that was Don, always encouraging his mentees through the years.

At ProMED-mail, we will feel his loss greatly. He was an excellent associate editor with excellent ideas. We are also at a loss for who will take over as the top moderator on duty when IT issues will arise. Don, as an IT user (cautiously), was known as the "top mod" who inevitably was on call whenever our IT system would break down (not at all related to anything Don did).

I could go on with many more fond memories. . . . Don will be sorely missed by all and remembered fondly by many.

--
Marjorie P Pollack, MD
deputy editor
ProMED-mail
<pollack@promedmail.org>

******
[4]
Date: Tue 14 Jul 2020
From: Larry Madoff [edited]


Don was a legend in the infectious disease world, one of the greats, and I was honored to work with his sons Ken and Keith when they began their infectious disease training at Harvard in the 1980s and '90s. Ken and I would both work together at the Channing Lab and Brigham and Women's Hospital for many years. It was truly a privilege to be able to bring their dad, Don, into ProMED in 2002. I offered him whatever role he wanted to play, and he opted for associate editor. In this capacity, he felt he would be able to learn more about areas of ID that were less familiar to him (animal health, for example), and I knew his wisdom would tremendously inform ProMED. It has been a privilege to work with him these many years, and we will miss him greatly.

--
Larry Madoff, MD
editor
ProMED-mail
<lmadoff@promedmail.org>

******
[5]
Date: Thu 16 Jul 2020
From: Linda MacKinnon [edited]


On behalf of the Program for Monitoring Emerging Diseases (ProMED) and International Society for Infectious Diseases (ISID) around the globe, we will miss Don immensely as a leader and contributor in the world of infectious diseases. We recognize Don for all his many years of dedicated service to the society. A mentor and friend, you will not be forgotten.

--
Linda C MacKinnon, MPH, PMP
deputy executive director
director of emerging disease surveillance
International Society for Infectious Diseases

******
[6]
Date: Tue 14 Jul 2020
From: The ProMED family [edited]

[A]
I met Don while in ProMED. He is such a great figure at the human and professional levels. Don will be missed by the ProMED family. May his soul rest in peace.

--
Ghassan M Matar
moderator, MENA/AMR

----
[B]
I never had the opportunity to meet Don in person, but I have learned so much from him as a top mod; I always found him diligent, helpful, and committed to ensuring we all stayed on top of our posts (I tend to laze around on some posts on the dashboard).

My deepest sentiments for his family and loved ones. We move on, and we carry fond memories along.

--
Uzma Bashir Aamir
moderator, SoAs

----
[C]
Don, you are dearly missed by all of us at ProMED!

--
Sok Touch
moderator, MBDS

----
[D]
Don always wanted, pushed for, and generally got excellence. We had many spirited email exchanges and, when we met, hugs. I loved his help, but his zest for life, his continual push to learn, see, and do something new was refreshing and encouraging. I will forever remember his boyish smile when he walked up to me at a ProMED meeting in Cancun, Mexico, and gleefully told me he had just passed his scuba test. I think he was floating above the dock as he dripped water everywhere, laughing and almost dancing as he headed to change into more appropriate dinner wear. Don, you will be missed.

--
Tam Garland
moderator

.................................................lm/ml/mpp/jh/ml/ml/mpp/ml/mpp/tw/sh
</body>
