<header id=003101>
Published Date: 2011-04-24 05:26:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Pythiosis, equine - USA
Archive Number: 20110424.1283
</header>
<body id=003101>
PYTHIOSIS, EQUINE - USA
***********************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 22 Apr 2011
Source: The Horse.com Article No. 18146 [edited]
http://www.thehorse.com/ViewArticle.aspx?ID=18146


If your horse doesn't live in a tropical or subtropical region,
you've most likely never had to worry about equine pythiosis, a
relatively rare and sometimes fatal skin infection that causes
tumor-like masses and ulcerated lesions in horses. But researchers
have noted recently that the disease is now also affecting horses in
cooler, drier climates, indicating that it's becoming more widespread
and is an affliction more horse owners need to be aware of.

According to Leonel Mendoza, an associate professor in the Department
of Microbiology at Michigan State University, who recently completed a
review on the disease, equine pythiosis is a rare infection caused by
a fungus-like microorganism called _Pythium insidiosum_. The
infection, typically found in tropical and subtropical climates, has
recently been diagnosed farther north than usual, appearing in drier
states such as Arizona, California, and Washington state. The reason
for the geographic spread of the disease remains unknown.

The causative agent resides in standing water or moist soil and finds
its way into small wounds on a horse's legs, lower abdomen, chest, or
face, causing large, tumor-like masses that ulcerate. These itchy
lesions contain necrotic (dead) tissue with a characteristic strong
odor and draining tracts, and they contain stony masses called
"kunkers" at their core.

Once considered a rare infection in the United States, pythiosis is a
non-contagious disease with hundreds of cases reported annually in
dogs and horses, and few cases in humans (1-2 per year). Mendoza notes
that there have been no reports of animal-to-animal or animal-to-human
(or vice versa) transmission of the disease.

An increased interest in or recognition of the disease has
accompanied its spread, and some researchers have described the
disease as "emerging." However, other authorities on the subject,
including Mendoza, disagree, noting that the disease was described as
early as 1884 in India.

No breed, age, or sex predilection appears to exist, so all horses
have a similar risk for contracting the disease. If pythiosis is
suspected in a horse that begins to develop lesions in the described
areas, veterinarians advise testing for the disease (via blood test or
biopsy) as quickly as possible. Long-standing (chronic) cases are less
likely to respond to treatment than cases that are caught promptly
(generally within 2 weeks).

A treatment technique called immunotherapy (referred to the
researchers as vaccination) is reportedly associated with a very high
success rate. Researchers on one study reported that 72 per cent of 18
horses recovered completely from pythiosis following vaccination.
(Mendoza notes, however, that most of these horses had undergone other
treatment modalities in addition to the vaccination, including surgery
to excise the lesion, or administration of various drugs such as
antifungal agents). Thus, the chance of curing a horse with the
vaccine alone remains unclear.

"Despite this, immunotherapy remains the 1st choice for the
management of equine pythiosis in the USA," said Mendoza.

He noted that although _P. insidiosum_ is not a fungus, veterinarians
sometimes turn to antifungal agents as treatment; however, these drugs
are not associated with a high success rate.

[byline: Stacey Oke]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Pythiosis is an uncommon cutaneous/subcutaneous, gastrointestinal,
or multi-systemic disease caused by a water mold. It has been reported
in dogs, horses, cats, cattle, humans and a captive zoo bear.10 Cases
have predominantly been documented worldwide in tropical, subtropical
and other wet, warm climates. Recent emergence of pythiosis in more
temperate regions suggests that the disease is more widespread than
previously suspected. Horses are most commonly affected followed by
dogs and, rarely, cats.

Pythiosis is caused by the aquatic pathogen_ Pythium insidiosum_ in
every reported case of mammalian disease.10 There are nearly 85
species of _Pythium_, most of which are parasites of plants, fish, and
crustaceans.10 An as yet undetermined species of _Lagenidium_ is
responsible for lagenidiosis in dogs.4 The genus _Lagenidium_ includes
more than 50 species of which most are natural parasites of algae,
fungi, rotifers, nematodes, crustaceans,_ Daphne_, and mosquito
larvae.4 _L. giganteum_, a parasite of mosquito larvae, has been
approved by the Environmental Protection Agency for use in the United
States as a biological control of the adult mosquito population.4

Both _Pythium_ and _Lagenidium_ species belong to the kingdom
stramenopila, phylum oomycota, and class oomycetes.10 The oomycetes,
often referred to as water molds, have many characteristics in common
with the fungi but are phylogenetically distinct.3 Oomycetes differ
from true fungi in that they produce motile, flagellate zoospores,
have a cell wall that does not contain chitin, and have different
metabolic pathways and organelle structure. The lack of sterol
components within the plasma membrane of oomycetes is clinically
significant since ergosterol is the target molecule for the action of
most antifungal drugs.3

_Pythium_ sp. and _Lagenidium_ sp. are believed to have life cycles
that are similar to that of other oomycetes (Figure 1).10 When placed
in water, oomycete hyphae develop sporangia which eventually form
multiple biflagellate zoospores. The zoospores then break through the
vesicle wall and swim away and encyst. These zoospores are thought to
be the infectious stage and have been shown to display chemotactic
behavior toward damaged animal and plant tissues. Oomycetes also have
the ability to form resistant spores when ambient conditions do not
favor zoospore formation.10

The diagnosis of oomycete infections can be difficult due to the
clinical and histological similarity between the oomycetes themselves
as well as the similarities between oomycotic and zygomycotic
infections.4 Some cases of lagiendiosis have probably been
misdiagnosed as pythiosis. Though misdiagnosis of lagenidosis as
pythiosis does not have clinical repercussions, misdiagnosis of
zygomycosis as oomycosis may lead to inappropriate treatment regimens
as zygomycetes are true fungi. Although there are histological
differences between _Lagenidium_ sp._, Pythium insidiosum_, and
zygomycete organisms, they are not distinct enough for definitive
diagnosis.4 A _P. insidiosum_-specific polyclonal antibody has been
developed that does not stain _Lagenidium_ sp. hyphae. The
effectiveness of this primary antibody in immunohistochemical staining
is currently under investigation.4

Currently, the diagnostic test of choice is culture of infected
tissue followed by morphologic and molecular identification of the
pathogen. Small pieces of tissue are placed on PYG agar and incubated
at 37 C. Growth should be apparent after 24 hours. Samples that must
be shipped should arrive within 48 hours and should be packaged at
ambient temperature (organisms may be impossible to culture if the
tissue has been refrigerated or frozen). Bacterial contamination often
prevents adequate growth of oomycetes. In such instances, antibiotic
impregnated agar can prevent bacterial overgrowth.4 Even under the
best of conditions, _Pythium_ sp. is very difficult to grow and even
harder to identify because it requires sporulation and identification
of the zoospores.

PCR assays are available to detect oomycete DNA sequences in nucleic
acid extracted from agar cultures, blood, or tissue biopsies. This
technique also can differentiate zygomycosis, pythiosis, and
lagenidiosis.4

Two ELISA tests are available for detection of anti-P. insidiosum
antibodies in animals. Both of these tests are highly specific and
sensitive.4 ELISA also may be useful in monitoring the response to
treatment. Elimination of oomycete infection results in a serial
decrease in antibody titer if treatment is successful.5

The treatment of choice for oomycosis has been aggressive surgical
resection.3,10 Whenever possible, complete amputation of affected
limbs may be curative.2 In cases of advanced gastrointestinal and
disseminated disease, total surgical excision may be impossible. In
advanced gastrointestinal disease, infection usually involves the
extensive portions of the alimentary tract and mesentery. Furthermore,
the recurrence rate after surgery also is very high if the affected
area is not completely excised.3,10 Due to possible recurrence, it has
been recommended that surgical excision be followed by systemic
administration of antifungal drugs.10 However, antifungal therapy may
not be effective because of the lack of ergosterol (the target
molecule of antifungal drugs) in the plasma membranes of oomycetes.
This probably explains why antifungal chemotherapy alone has shown
very little success in treating oomycosis.5

Recently, immunotherapy using a newly formulated vaccine has been
successful in treating cutaneous pythiosis in horses and dogs.5 This
vaccine has been shown to be effective for both acute and chronic
cutaneous pythiosis in the horse.5,10 In one report, a dog was cured
of cutaneous disease with only 2 injections of this vaccine given 2
weeks apart.5

For most oomycotic infections the prognosis is guarded to poor
regardless of the advances in treatment. The reason is that many dogs
have extensive gastrointestinal disease, and many horses have multiple
bone lesions at the time of initial presentation.3,10 Disseminated
disease and bone lesions are negative prognosticators in any species.
The rate of recurrence after attempted surgical excision has also been
a major factor in the failure of treatment.

References
3. Foil CS. Miscellaneous fungal infections. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, 2nd ed. Phildaelphia: WB
Saunders, 1998, pp.420-30.
4. Grooters AM, Hodgin C, Bauer RW, et al. Clinicopathological
findings associated with _Lagenidium_ sp. infection in 6 dogs: Initial
description of an emerging oomycosis. J Vet Intern Med. 2003; 17:
637-46.
5. Hensel P, Greene CE, Medleau L, et al. Immunotherapy for treatment
of multicentric cutaneous pythiosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
2003; 223: 215-8.
10. Mendoza L. _Pythium insidiosum_.
http://medtech.cls.msu.edu/medtech/mendoza/

This comment has been extracted from:
http://www.vet.uga.edu/vpp/clerk/stephens/index.php. This website
contains a wealth of information and some excellent, however
revolting, photographs of cases. - Mod.TG]

.................................................sb/tg/msp/sh
</body>
