<header id=045638>
Published Date: 2015-03-02 12:23:06 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Melioidosis - USA (04): update
Archive Number: 20150302.3202447
</header>
<body id=045638>
MELIOIDOSIS - USA (04): UPDATE
******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 1 Mar 2015
Source: USA Today [edited]
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/03/01/tulane-primate-bio-lab-bacteria-release/24137053/


A dangerous, often deadly, type of bacteria that lives in soil and water has been released from a high-security laboratory at the Tulane National Primate Research Center in Louisiana. Officials say there is no risk to the public. Yet despite weeks of investigation by multiple federal and state agencies, the cause of the release and the extent of the contamination remain unknown, according to interviews and records obtained by USA Today.

The incident has raised concerns that bacteria from the lab may have contaminated the facility's grounds and though initial, limited tests didn't detect it, some officials are pressing behind the scenes for more action, records show. The safety breach at Tulane's massive lab complex 35 miles north of New Orleans is the latest in a recent series of significant biosafety accidents at some of the most prestigious laboratories in the country, where research is performed on bacteria and viruses that are classified as potential bioterror agents.

The Tulane incident involves the release, possibly in November 2014 or earlier, of a bacterium called _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, which is primarily found in South East Asia and northern Australia and is spread to humans and animals through direct contact with contaminated soil and water where it can live and grow. Tulane's research, which has been halted by federal officials, was part of an effort to develop a vaccine against the bacteria. It was conducted mostly with rodents inside a secure biosafety level 3 laboratory with multiple layers of safety equipment that were supposed to ensure the pathogen couldn't get out.

Yet at least 4 monkey-like rhesus macaques -- that were never used in the experiments and were kept in large outdoor cages in another part of the 500-acre facility -- have been exposed to the bacteria, initial tests have found. 2 of the macaques became ill in November 2014; both eventually had to be euthanized. Meanwhile, a federal investigator, who became ill 24 hours after visiting the facility in January 2015 as part of the ongoing release investigation, has also tested positive for exposure to the bacteria, though it remains unclear whether her exposure may have occurred during international travel and not at the lab.

Andrew Lackner, director of the Tulane primate center, said the investigation so far indicates that the 4 macaques were exposed to the bacteria while being cared for in the complex's veterinary hospital, and he emphasized that tests of 39 soil and 13 water samples from the center's grounds have not detected the presence of the bacteria. "There has never been a public health threat," Lackner said. The primate center is located in Covington, Louisiana, near wetlands and a river, across the street from a school and close to a neighborhood.

The 1st indication of trouble came in early November 2014, when Tulane staff discovered 2 sick macaques kept among 4000 animals in a huge outdoor breeding colony on the compound's South Campus. The 2 sick animals lived separately in different chain-link enclosures that are among dozens of "field cages" on the campus. They were transported by van to the primate center's veterinary hospital in Building 21, about a 5-minute drive away on the facility's North Campus, where several buildings with labs and offices are located.

Initially, there was no reason to be concerned, Tulane officials said. "Animals get sick all the time, just like people do," said Lackner, the primate center director. Yet despite extensive clinical workups, including exploratory surgeries, a diagnosis was initially elusive. One of the macaques became so ill it had to be euthanized on 26 Nov 2014. The other animal initially appeared to recover, but relapsed and was euthanized on 19 Feb 2014. After a series of increasingly specific tests on the 2 animals indicated that they may be infected with _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, Tulane sent specimens to CDC's labs, which confirmed the diagnosis. "Things really ratcheted up after that," Lackner said.

By mid-January 2015, additional testing by CDC scientists determined that the strain of bacteria that sickened the 2 macaques was identical to the strain Tulane was using in its research in a highly secured lab elsewhere on the property. The strain -- known as Strain 1026b -- was originally recovered from a rice farmer sickened in Thailand in 1993, CDC told USA Today. Rice farming is a common way people are infected, because the bacteria live in contaminated soil and water and can enter the body through cuts or sores on the skin.

With a lab release confirmed, CDC ordered Tulane's primate center to stop all research involving _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ and all other pathogens that are classified as "select agents", the federal government's term for bacteria, viruses and toxins that pose significant threats to public health or agriculture and have the potential to be used as bioweapons.

The diagnosis of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ infections outside Tulane's lab was of special concern because the 2 animals had been living in outdoor cages, and the bacteria have the potential to establish colonies in soil and water, potentially contaminating their cages or spreading into the environment.

The state homeland security agency activated a command center to help coordinate a response. From 20-24 Jan 2015, a team of federal investigators visited multiple locations on the primate center's campus seeking answers to what had happened. Then, in a surprising development, a day after leaving the facility, one of the USDA select agent investigators became ill and was hospitalized. Results of a 6 Feb 2015 blood test showed she had antibodies indicating a possible current or prior exposure to _Burkholderia pseudomallei_. She has since recovered from her illness. CDC officials noted that the USDA investigator had a history of international travel to an undisclosed region that could have been the source of her exposure. Blood tests so far show a stable immune response, indicating she likely was not exposed at Tulane, CDC has said. But further testing is needed.

After the USDA investigator's potential exposure, federal officials returned to the primate center on 9-12 Feb 2015 to take an even closer look at the facility and its procedures, state records show. By 25 Feb 2015, ongoing tests had identified 2 additional animals from the outdoor breeding colony that had antibodies to _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, indicating they had been exposed even though they were not showing any signs of illness. Only 2 of the 4 exposed animals shared the same outdoor field cage, Lackner said.

But all 4 have one thing in common: All had been in the center's veterinary hospital around the same time, which has led CDC and Tulane to say the hospital is the leading suspect for where the animals were exposed to the bacteria.

Even though the 2 euthanized animals became ill while living outdoors, Lackner said they may have been sick with something else before going to the hospital, and their weakened immune systems made them more susceptible to a secondary infection by the bacteria once there. The 2 other animals that weren't sickened but show signs of burkholderia exposure were in the hospital because of injuries and not illness, he said. While investigators suspect the hospital may be ground zero for the macaques' infections, there are no tests from surfaces or equipment in the hospital showing the bacteria were ever present there. It had been decontaminated before the location became a prime suspect.

The deadly bacteria should never have been in the hospital or anyplace else where the outdoor macaques could have been exposed to it. _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ should only have been inside the specific Tulane lab that was doing vaccine development research.

That research was being conducted in a biosafety level 3 laboratory -- the 2nd highest containment level -- with a wide range of high-tech safeguards, physical barriers and procedures that are supposed to ensure that dangerous pathogens can't escape. The lab, as Tulane describes it, is essentially a "box-within-a-box within a box". The research was being done in a completely contained lab under negative air pressure, inside Building 5. Air leaving the chamber passes through multiple HEPA filters before leaving the building.

Access to the BSL-3 lab is strictly controlled. To enter, staff must have an authorized access card, and procedures call for employees to change into protective clothing and use personal protective equipment while in the laboratory. Contaminated gear can't leave a BSL-3 lab without being sterilized. Everything that goes in -- cages, animal bedding, supplies -- can't come out without being sterilized. Research animals that go into the primate center's BSL-3 labs do not come out alive and never go to the hospital, the center said.

The veterinary hospital, where the macaques may have been exposed, is in Building 21 about a 5-minute walk from Building 5, according to Tulane. The breeding colony where they lived on the South Campus is about a 5-minute drive, and access to the area is controlled with proximity cards and a double-fence and gate system. The individual field cages are locked. [See the USA Today article for aerial photographs of the laboratory site. -Mod.MHJ]

[byline: Alison Young]

--
communicated by:
Michael P Owen
16160 NE 11th Street
Bellevue, WA 98008-3527
<owenmp@seanet.com>

[_Burkholderia pseudomallei_ can cause a potentially serious disease in people and animals called melioidosis that has a wide range of non-specific symptoms, such as fever, headache, loss of appetite, muscle and joint pain, and infections are often mistaken for other diseases such as pneumonia or tuberculosis. The time between exposure to the bacteria and the development of symptoms can range from one day to many years, according to CDC, though most human infections do not cause symptoms.

Several countries have studied using the bacteria as a bioweapon because strains can be obtained from the environment and engineered to be resistant to multiple antibiotics, according to the UPMC Center for Health Security, an independent biosecurity think tank.

In Thailand, where the bacteria is endemic, the fatality rate for patients with melioidosis is up to 50 per cent; in Australia it can be up to 20 per cent, according to published studies. Confirmed infections are relatively rare. There were 176 culture-confirmed cases of melioidosis in Australia's north Queensland during the 10-year period 2000-2009, according to that country's health department. - Mod.MHJ

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3202447,221.]
See Also
Melioidosis - USA (03): comment 20150216.3168433
Melioidosis - USA (02): background 20150211.3159588
Melioidosis - USA: (LA) primate, human 20150210.3157436
.................................................mhj/msp/sh
</body>
