<header id=022394>
Published Date: 2021-09-28 17:21:51 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hookworms - USA: drug resistant
Archive Number: 20210928.8698771
</header>
<body id=022394>
HOOKWORMS - USA: DRUG RESISTANT
*******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 22 Sep 2021
Source: Science Daily [edited]
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/09/210922121842.htm


Hookworms are one of the most common parasites plaguing the companion animal world.

They use their hooklike mouths to latch onto an animal's intestines, where they feast on tissue fluids and blood. Infected animals can experience dramatic weight loss, bloody stool, anemia, and lethargy, among other issues.

Now they've become multiple-drug resistant, according to new research from the University of Georgia (UGA).

Right now, US veterinarians rely on 3 types of drugs to kill the hookworms, but the parasites appear to be becoming resistant to all of them. Researchers from the UGA College of Veterinary Medicine 1st reported this concerning development in 2019, and new research, published recently in the International Journal for Parasitology: Drugs and Drug Resistance, provides deeper insight into where the problem started and how bad it's since become.

For the present study [see citation below], the researchers focused on current and former racing greyhounds. Dog racetracks are particularly conducive to spreading the parasite due to the sandy ground of the facilities, an ideal breeding ground for hookworms. Because of the conditions, all the dogs are dewormed about every 3-4 weeks.

After analyzing fecal samples from greyhound adoption kennels, 3 veterinary practices working with adoption groups, and an active racing kennel, the researchers found the parasites were highly prevalent in the breed. Four out of every 5 greyhounds tested came up positive for hookworms. And the ones testing negative are probably also infected, said Ray Kaplan, the study's corresponding author and a former professor of veterinary parasitology at UGA. Hookworms can sometimes "hide" in tissues, where they won't reproduce and shed eggs until the infection worsens and leaks into the dog's intestines.

But perhaps more alarming, the team saw the dogs still had high levels of infection with hookworms even after being treated for them.

The study marks the 1st demonstration of widespread multiple-drug resistance in a dog parasite reported in the world.

In situations where there are a lot of dogs infected with a lot of parasites, such as on racing dog breeding farms and kennels, there are many more opportunities for parasites to develop rare mutations allowing them to survive the dewormer treatments. If dewormers are applied frequently, the newly emerging resistant worms will survive and pass on the mutation that helped them sneak past the drug to their offspring.

With repeated treatments over time, most of the drug-susceptible worms at the farm or kennel will be killed, and the resistant worms will then predominate.

Compounding the problem, veterinarians don't typically test animals after treatment to ensure the worms are gone, so the drug-resistant worms go unnoticed until the dog has a heavy infection and starts showing signs of hookworm disease.

The researchers found almost all the fecal samples tested positive for the mutation enabling hookworms to survive treatment with benzimidazoles, a broad-spectrum class of dewormers used in both animals and humans. Although a molecular test does not yet exist to test for the resistance to the other 2 types of drugs, other types of testing by the team showed the hookworms were resistant to those drugs as well.

"There's a very committed greyhound adoption industry because they are lovely dogs," said Kaplan. "I used to own one. But as those dogs are adopted, the drug-resistant hookworms are going to show up in other pet dogs."

One possible breeding ground for a potential drug-resistant hookworm outbreak is also the place many dog owners use to exercise their animals: dog parks.

"Personally, I would not take my dog to a dog park," Kaplan said. "If your dog picks up these resistant hookworms, it's not as easy as just treating them with medication anymore. Until new types of drugs are available, taking your dog to a dog park has to be considered a risky activity."

Dogs don't have to ingest the worms to become infected. Hookworm larvae live in the soil and can also burrow through the dog's skin and paws. And female dogs can pass the parasite on to their puppies through their milk.

If that's not scary enough, dog hookworms can also infect humans.

The infection doesn't manifest in the same way in people, but after the worms penetrate the skin, they cause a red, very itchy rash as they travel under the skin. As the number of drug-resistant worms grows, they'll also pose a risk to humans.

Previously, doctors would treat patients with an ointment containing a dewormer along with a corticosteroid. "Unfortunately, it's not going to work against these drug-resistant hookworms," Kaplan said.

But hope isn't entirely lost.

Kaplan and Pablo Jimenez Castro, lead author of the study and a recent doctoral graduate from Kaplan's lab, found in another recent study these multiple-drug-resistant dog hookworms do appear to be susceptible to emodepside, a dewormer currently only approved for use in cats in the US. But use of this cat drug on dogs should only be performed by a veterinarian, as it requires veterinary expertise and supervision.

Based in part on Castro's work, the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists recently formed a national task force to address the issue of drug resistance in canine hookworms.

[Byline: Leigh Beeson]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The citation for the study referenced above follows:
Jimenez Castro PD, Venkatesan A, Redman E, et al. Multiple drug resistance in hookworms infecting greyhound dogs in the USA. International Journal for Parasitology: Drugs and Drug Resistance. 2021; 17: 107-117; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpddr.2021.08.005.

This article is frightening for pets, for owners, and even for veterinarians. It is extremely concerning when a very listless pet comes in with mucus membranes and gums looking very pale or even white.

While we speak mostly of dogs, cats can also have hookworms. Sadly, we are also seeing resistant parasites in both cats and dogs. We became aware of resistant parasites, especially hookworms, in 2017. However, this situation has proceeded to get worse.

Do not make the mistake of thinking they are not in your area. These resistant parasites are widespread. We live in a mobile society, and we travel with our pets and consequently spread the resistance.

If you are breeding your pet, please be sure to have your animal checked and treated, if needed, before, during, and after the pregnancy. Please don't let the puppies or kittens arrive infected into this world. Remember, they can be passed from the mother animal to the offspring while in utero.

"Hookworms in dogs, scientifically known as _Ancylostoma caninum_ or _A. braziliense_, are intestinal parasites that literally hook themselves into the lining of your dog's intestines. They are named for their hook-like mouthpieces, which they use to attach themselves to the intestinal wall and to feed off the tiny blood vessels in the intestinal lining. Despite their small size, only 3 mm [0.1 in] in length, this feeding practice can lead to severe anemia.

"The life cycle of the hookworm has 3 stages: egg, larvae, and adult. The microscopic eggs pass through the feces, where they hatch into larvae and contaminate the environment. The larvae can survive for weeks or even months before infecting your dog. The larvae then migrate through the dog's body until they come to the intestine, where they mature into adults and lay eggs, perpetuating the cycle.

"There are 4 ways dogs can get this unpleasant parasite:
- oral ingestion
- direct contact with the skin
- in utero
- through the bitch's milk

"Dogs accidentally ingest the larvae by sniffing or eating contaminated soil or feces. They can also ingest larvae by grooming their paws or by drinking contaminated water, and larvae can burrow into the skin of unsuspecting dogs if the dog lies on contaminated soil.

"Mothers pass lots of good traits on to their pups. They can also pass along hookworms. The larvae infect the puppies either in the uterus or through the bitch's milk when the puppies nurse. This is concerning, as hookworms can lead to severe anemia in puppies, which can be fatal.

"Signs of hookworms in dogs
As with most diseases, catching hookworms early can save your dog a lot of discomfort. There are several symptoms of hookworms in dogs that owners should be aware of to help them catch an infection before it becomes a problem. These symptoms include
- anemia
- pale gums
- weakness
- weight loss
- bloody diarrhea
- itchy paws
- poor growth
- death

"These signs could also be a sign of another illness, so make sure you call your vet if you notice any or all of these signs in your pet.

"If your vet suspects your dog has hookworm, the veterinarian will perform a diagnostic test called a fecal float to look for hookworm eggs. This test is generally a very reliable method of detecting hookworms, as the parasite produces large numbers of eggs on a daily basis. The test is sometimes less reliable in very young puppies, as it takes 2-3 weeks for the larvae to mature and produce eggs, so talk to your vet about deworming protocols that can help prevent a hookworm infection in litters.

"Treating hookworms in dogs
Treating hookworms in dogs requires the intervention of a veterinarian who can prescribe your dog with a dewormer, or anthelmintic. These drugs are usually oral and come with few side effects, but they kill only the adult hookworms. This means that your vet will probably recommend treating your dog again in 2-4 weeks to eliminate any new adults that formed from the surviving larvae. In rare cases, your dog might require a blood transfusion to help combat severe anemia.

"Preventing hookworms in dogs
Preventing reinfection is a key part of treating hookworms. Since the eggs pass through the feces, it is crucial owners clean up dog poop immediately, before the larvae have a chance to infect the environment. Unfortunately, there is no approved product on the market to remove larvae from yards, so talk to your vet about adding a heartworm preventative that protects against heartworms and hookworms to your dog's preventative care plan while you wait for the hookworm larvae to die."

"Perhaps the most concerning aspect of hookworms in dogs is the potential for human infection. While adult hookworms cannot infect humans, the larvae can burrow into the human body. Lying on infected soil can allow hookworm larvae to burrow under your skin, which causes uncomfortable itching and is commonly referred to as 'ground itch.'

"Hookworms in humans can be dangerous. The migrating larvae can penetrate and damage internal organs and eyes, causing blindness and complications. Luckily, these conditions are rare and can be avoided by preventing contact between skin and moist, hookworm-infected soil. Bathing and washing your hands regularly can help prevent infection.

"Preventing parasites is an important part of responsible pet ownership. Knowing the signs of hookworms in dogs and how to prevent hookworms will help keep your dog happy, healthy, and hookworm-free. For more information about hookworms, or if you suspect your pet has a hookworm infection, talk to your veterinarian."
(https://www.akc.org/expert-advice/health/understanding-hookworms-in-dogs/)

- Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED map of United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8698771,106]
See Also
2017
----
Hookworm, United States: (AL) 20170915.5319237
.................................................sb/tg/tw/jh
</body>
