<header id=062446>
Published Date: 2015-10-07 15:09:03 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Toxic algae - UK (04): water, warning
Archive Number: 20151007.3698634
</header>
<body id=062446>
TOXIC ALGAE - UK (04): WATER, WARNING
*************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 6 Oct 2015
Source: Maidstone and Medway News [edited]
http://www.maidstoneandmedwaynews.co.uk/WARNING-Toxic-blue-green-algae-threatens-dogs/story-27930663-detail/story.html


Pet experts are warning against the dangers of a poisonous form of algae. Blue-green algae are found within various water bodies, including garden ponds or streams in late summer. It can be a potential toxin to dogs.

Pets4Homes is advising that algae blooms are not always noticeable, meaning a pool or stream that was fine before may suddenly not be.

Bouts of blue-green algae have been found in water bodies across the country over the last few days.

To make sure dog owners are aware of the dangers, here is everything you need to know.

What is it?
With normal water levels, algae are spread evenly, which lowers their concentration. But when the weather has been hot, with not a lot of rain, the poor air circulation and low water levels increase the amount of algae.

Algae form in large blooms and then die off, giving off a gas that raises the algae to the surface of the water. They collect and find their way toward the banks, easily found by animals stopping to drink or swim.

Drinking the water or licking themselves after swimming has a toxic effect on the stomach and internal organs.

What to look out for
It is not always apparent that there are algae in the water at all. But they often make the water appear very green, and you may actually be able to see huge algae blooms within the water itself.

Signs
The level of signs depends on where in the body the toxin is affecting.

Signs of liver toxicity include generalised weakness and lethargy, diarrhoea, which may be bloody, pale mucous membranes and neurological changes and changes in temperament.

Symptoms of nervous system toxicity include laboured breathing, lethargy and difficulty moving, muscle tremors and convulsions or fitting.

Left untreated, both types of toxicity can soon prove fatal.

What to do
If your dog has been swimming in or drinking from an outdoor water source and exhibits any of the above symptoms, you should take them to the vet as a matter of urgency.

Explain to the vet where your dog has been, and, if possible, take a water sample from where your dog was for testing.

Blood and urine panels can help your vet to make a definitive diagnosis, but the history of your dog's activities and the water that they have been in are the most important tools in diagnosis.

Treatment
This can be challenging, as the dog has drunk the water and absorbed the toxins. It also depends on how the toxins are affecting the dog's system. The faster you get help, the more likely it is that your dog will be ok.

Treatments can include something to help them vomit up the water or activated charcoal to help them absorb as much of it as possible in the stomach.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[There are a number of very toxic blue-green algae or cyanobacteria. The toxin may be present even if the algae are not, and likewise the algae may be present but the toxin may not be. However, safety for humans and animals means avoiding bodies of water with any blue-green algae.

Athletes and many non-athletic swimmers will ingest some water despite their best efforts to avoid it. However, just swimming in water that looks like pea-green soup does not sound appealing or healthy.

"There are a number of blue-green algae, many of which are toxic, frequently resulting in rapid death for animals. Blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria, are a group of photosynthetic bacteria that many people refer to as "pond scum." Blue-green algae are most often blue-green in color, but can also be blue, green, reddish-purple, or brown. Blue-green algae generally grow in lakes, ponds, and slow-moving streams when the water is warm and enriched with nutrients like phosphorus or nitrogen.

"When environmental conditions are just right, blue-green algae can grow very quickly. Most species are buoyant and will float to the surface, where they form scum layers or floating mats. When this happens, we call this a "blue-green algae bloom." Blue-green algae blooms generally occur between mid-June and late September, although in rare instances, blooms have been observed in winter, even under the ice.

"Many different species of blue-green algae occur, but the most commonly detected include _Anabaena_ sp, _Aphanizomenon_ sp, _Microcystis_ sp, and _Planktothrix_ sp. It is not always the same species that blooms in a given water body, and the dominant species can change over the course of the season.

"Blue-green algal toxins are naturally produced chemical compounds that sometimes are produced inside the cells of certain species of blue-green algae. These chemicals are not produced all of the time, and there is no easy way to tell when blue-green algae are producing them and when they are not. When the cells are broken open, the toxins may be released. Sometimes this occurs when the cells die off naturally and they break open as they sink and decay in a lake or pond. Cells may also be broken open when the water is treated with chemicals meant to kill algae, and when cells are swallowed and mixed with digestive acids in the stomachs of people or animals.

"Typical clinical signs in dogs exposed to blue-green algae include seizures, vomiting, and/or diarrhea after contact with surface water. Although the water appears clear, if a "bloom" is just starting, it may be difficult to see any sheen, an early indication of blue-green algae formation. Some forms of blue-green algae may start forming slightly below the surface and may not be visible, but are just as toxic.

"One toxic alga frequently involved in illness and deaths is _Microcystis aeruginosa_, a single-celled blue green alga, or cyanobacterium, that occurs naturally in surface waters. Microcystis can proliferate to form dense blooms and mats under certain conditions. Many variants of these cyanobacteria produce multiple toxins, including the potent liver toxin microcystin. When microcystis die, their cells break open, releasing the toxin microcystin into the water. Ingestion of water or algal cells containing microcystin has produced adverse effects in fish, dogs, cats, livestock, and humans. Sometimes the mats and the sheen of the organisms are visible on the surface of the water, if it is a pond. In larger bodies of water, such as large lakes, it may be more difficult or impossible to see the sheen or the mat of accumulation.

"People swimming in dense microcystis blooms have experienced irritation such as skin rashes, burns, and blistering of the mouth. Ingestion or inhalation of water containing dense bloom material may cause vomiting, nausea, headaches, diarrhea, pneumonia, and fever. Ingestion of significant levels of the toxin microcystin can cause liver damage and dysfunction in humans and animals. No deaths from ingestion of microcystins have been reported in humans in the US; however, Brazil has reported human deaths. Dogs, wildlife, and livestock have died following exposure to this toxin.

"Microcystis blooms typically thrive in warm, turbid, and slow-moving waters. The blooms with the highest biomass occur in waters that are high in nitrogen or phosphorus (eutrophic waters). Microcystis also requires sufficient light intensity to conduct photosynthesis, which results in blooms.

"The commonest route of exposure to microcystin is drinking water, followed by recreational exposures and food supplements. Typical water treatment processes do not fully remove microcystin that might be present in drinking water supplies stored in reservoirs. Swimming and playing in water that contains, or recently contained, microcystis blooms is another common exposure route. Children have the highest risk of exposure since they tend to unintentionally ingest water while swimming. Microcystin can move through the aquatic food web, exposing fish and shellfish, as well as the people who consume them. Microcystin does not remain in edible fish and shellfish tissues for more than a few weeks. However, people who frequently consume sport fish caught from a water body that supports microcystis blooms have a higher risk of exposure. Dogs can ingest large amounts of microcystis cells when they clean their coats after playing in water. Livestock, wildlife, and dogs are exposed through drinking water containing microcystis or through ingesting algal mats."

Portions of this comment were extracted from http://oehha.ca.gov/ecotox/pdf/microfactsheet122408.pdf. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3698634,40.]
See Also
Toxic algae - UK (03): (England) water, warning 20151004.3689405
Toxic algae - Canada (AB) 20150828.3608622
Toxic algae - UK (02): (England) canine, fatal, alert 20150825.3599933
Toxic algae - USA (04): (KS) water, alert 20150822.3596160
Toxic algae - USA (03): (MA) 20150816.3581352
Toxic algae - UK: (North Wales) warning 20150816.3581349
Toxic algae - China (AH) 20150811.3570037
Toxic algae - USA (02): (MN) alert 20150704.3484283
Toxic algae - USA: (MN) pet deaths, alert 20150616.3440485
.................................................sb/tg/msp/ml
</body>
