<header id=031339>
Published Date: 2012-03-10 14:53:09 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Rabies - Netherlands (03): (Amsterdam) canine ex Morocco
Archive Number: 20120310.1066836
</header>
<body id=031339>
RABIES - NETHERLANDS (03): (AMSTERDAM), CANINE ex MOROCCO
*********************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 8 Mar 2012
Source: Eurosurveillance 2012; 17(10) 08 March [abbreviated & edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20112


Rabid puppy-dog imported into the Netherlands from Morocco via Spain, Feb 2012
--------------------------------------------------------------------
By: van Rijckevorsel GG, Swaan CM, van den Bergh JP, Goorhuis A, Baayen D, Isken L, et al.

[In February 2012 a rabid puppy dog was imported into Amsterdam, the Netherlands, from Morocco via Spain. Se: "Rabies - Netherlands (Amsterdam) canine ex Morocco. ProMED-mail archive number 20120218.1045852" for an initial account of the incident. The following information explaining the circumstances and the subsequent recommendations has been abstracted from this Eurosurveillance article.]

Background
----------
Inn a joint action between the Netherlands’ Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority, the Public Health Service of Amsterdam, and the Centre for Infectious Disease Control all exposed human and animal contacts were traced and, when necessary, provided with post-exposure prophylaxis. During the importation, the international legislations with respect to vaccination requirements were not fully obeyed by veterinarians and custom services.

On 28 January 2012, a Dutch couple residing in Morocco obtained an 8 week old puppy at a parking lot. They took the dog to a local veterinarian who microchipped the dog and issued a certificate of good health, yet no vaccinations were given. On 4 February 2012 the couple travelled by car and ferry from Morocco to Spain. At a veterinary clinic they acquired a European pet passport. On 11 February they returned to the Netherlands by air. Although the dog was cuddled by 3 Spanish customs officers at Malaga Airport, the dog passport was not examined by customs in Spain, nor in the Netherlands. Upon arrival the couple immediately introduced the puppy to friends and family. It showed normal behaviour at the time, yet became increasingly hostile over the following days. On 14 February, the owners contacted the veterinary practice after they had been bitten by the dog. The puppy was assumed to suffer from "puppy stress" caused by the new environment and was given sedative medication. In the morning of 15 February the dog’s behaviour became uncontrollable. When they realised that the puppy originated from Morocco, the veterinarians contacted the Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority (NVWA). As clinical signs indicated rabies, the NVWA advised to euthanise the dog for investigation. Rapid postmortem rabies diagnostics were performed by the Central Veterinary Institute (CVI). On the evening of 15 February rabies (classical rabies virus, genotype I) was confirmed.

After the notification on 15 February, the NVWA, the Public Health Service of Amsterdam (PHS Amsterdam) and the Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb/RIVM) initiated a joint action to identify and trace all humans and animals with possible exposure to the dog’s saliva in order to provide post-exposure prophylaxis and assess the risk to the general population. The dog was considered to be infectious to others during the 2 weeks prior to the day of onset of symptoms and until its death (28 January through 15 February).

Contact tracing
---------------
The owners were interviewed about their travel history since the date they acquired the puppy on 28 January. Throughout their journey, they had constantly supervised the puppy, and no unobserved exposure had taken place. In Morocco, no contacts were identified except for the local veterinarian. During the journey to Spain no other people or animals were in contact with the dog. In Spain, the couple stayed with 2 Dutch friends, visited a Spanish friend and a veterinary clinic, and stayed in 4 different hotels in 2 different towns. Apart from the 3 custom officers, the dog was stroked by an unknown person at a restaurant and one at Malaga airport. During the flight to Amsterdam, the dog was kept in a basket on the owners’ lap, and no contacts were reported. At Amsterdam Airport they were collected by car by 2 friends and their dog. On 11 and 12 February they met with numerous family, friends, and their children at 4 private locations. In one location, 2 cats were present. The remaining days they mostly stayed at home, except for the last visit to the veterinary clinic. A total of 43 contacts (including the 2 owners) residing in the Netherlands were identified among family, friends and the animal clinic. On several occasions, unidentified people in the street were petting the dog.

Public health action in the Netherlands
---------------------------------------
Upon notification the PHS physician on call immediately arranged post-exposure treatment for the owners (rabies vaccination with human diploid cell rabies vaccine (HDCV) and human rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) at the emergency department of the Academic Medical Centre (AMC). On the same evening most known contacts were informed by telephone. Within 24 hours their risk for transmission was assessed, and according to national and international guidelines post-exposure prophylaxis was recommended ([information tabulated in the original text] depending on the type of contact and category of exposure [1,2]. As it is known that children’s recollection of exposure might be unreliable, all 9 children were considered as having had a category III exposure. Casual petting on the street was categorised as category I exposure. No treatment was deemed necessary for these contacts.

As the investigations revealed no risk of rabies transmission to the general population, warning messages to alert the public were deemed unnecessary. Instead, an informative joint press statement by the PHS and NVWA was issued on 16 February describing the incident.

International public health action
----------------------------------
The CIb/RIVM issued an EWRS (early warning and response system) message to inform the member states of the European Union about this incident.

Bilateral contact was established with Spain in order to facilitate contact tracing there. In Spain 3 known contacts were informed directly by the PHS. The couple’s Spanish friend, considered to have category I exposure, had been previously vaccinated against rabies. Their Dutch friends, a category II and a category III contact, received treatment at a local hospital in Spain. As HRIG was not available locally, they returned to Amsterdam so that the category III contact could receive HRIG the following day. The contact details of the Spanish veterinarian and a picture of the dog were provided to the Spanish EWRS contact point. Unfortunately, it was not possible to obtain additional information on the other contacts who stroked the puppy, nor on how many contacts were traced or vaccinated in Spain overall.

The CIb/RIVM established a bilateral contact with their counterpart in Morocco, providing them with the contact details of the veterinarian that had seen the dog prior to its departure. We have as yet no information on the actions taken there.

Veterinary action
-----------------
The investigation revealed only few exposed animals. One dog and 2 cats were traced within 24 hours. The dog (imported from Greece in 2010 and vaccinated against rabies) received a booster vaccination. The 2 cats received vaccination on 15 February and quarantine was indicated. As a suitable quarantine place was not available, it was decided to euthanise both cats.

Conclusions
-----------
This is the first case of rabies (caused by the classical rabies virus) in domestic and/or wild animals in the Netherlands since 1988. The accidental import of a rabid puppy led to a resource-intensive and costly public health response. A total of 48 known contacts in 3 different countries needed to be traced, of whom 45 required post-exposure treatment. Including the imported dog, 3 animals were euthanised.

The owners tried to import the dog in a legal way, yet the international legislations were not followed properly by the veterinarians consulted in Morocco and Spain and customs in Spain and the Netherlands. In hindsight, the European dog passport was incorrectly issued by a Spanish veterinarian as, according to the EU legislation, dogs/animals from outside the European Union should be vaccinated for rabies and kept in quarantine for 3 months upon arrival [3,4]. Customs at 3 locations upon arrival and leaving in Spain and arrival in the Netherlands failed to check the vaccination status of the dog.

The NVWA is evaluating this course of events. Lessons learnt from the evaluation should be communicated internationally to urge veterinarians and customs departments to follow international legislation appropriately.

Veterinarians and customs officials across Europe should be aware of the risk of rabies importation by animals from within and outside Europe. Particular attention should be given to puppies under the age of 3 months, which must be vaccinated against rabies and consequently cannot be imported into Europe [3].

Illegal importation of animals from rabies-endemic countries outside the European Union probably occurs frequently. France reported 9 illegally imported rabid puppies and dogs over the last 10 years, 7 of which were imported from Morocco [5,6]. Therefore the public should be made aware of the risks involved in bringing home a living souvenir, and of the rules and regulations governing such an action.

[Links to the relevant references can be obtained by accessing the original text via the source URL.]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@proemdmail.org>

[It is regrettable that the European dog passport was incorrectly issued by a Spanish veterinarian since according to European Union (EU) legislation, dogs and other susceptible animals from outside the EU should be vaccinated for rabies and kept in quarantine for as period upon arrival. More alarming is the failure of customs officials at 3 locations upon entering and leaving Spain and arrival in the Netherlands to check the vaccination status of the dog.

Hopefully lessons will have been learned! - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1r1l, http://healthmap.org/r/1lNZ.]
See Also
Rabies - Netherlands (02) (Amsterdam) canine ex Morocco, OIE 20120221.1047643
Rabies - Netherlands (Amsterdam) canine ex Morocco 20120218.1045852
Rabies - UK: pet travel scheme amendment 20120122.1018492
2011
---
Rabies - France (02): (VD) canine ex Morocco 20110819.2524
Rabies - France: (VD) canine ex Morocco 20110812.2455
2004
---
Rabies, canine - France ex Morocco (03) 20040905.2480
Rabies, canine - France ex Morocco (02) 20040902.2445
Rabies, canine - France ex Morocco 20040829.2411
Rabies, canine - France ex Morocco: OIE 20040726.2047
Rabies, canine - France ex North Africa: OIE 20040222.0564
2002
---
Rabies, canine - France ex North Africa (02) 20020928.5424
Rabies, canine - France ex North Africa: OIE alert 20020927.5414
.................................................cp/sh
</body>
