<header id=047671>
Published Date: 2018-10-04 01:01:07 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Monkeypox - UK (05): ex Nigeria
Archive Number: 20181004.6069282
</header>
<body id=047671>
MONKEYPOX - UK (05): ex NIGERIA
*******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 2 Oct 2018
Source: The Gazette [edited]
https://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/news/health/patients-offered-smallpox-vaccine-to-protect-against-potential-monkeypox-infection-1-9375758


Patients who visited their GP the same day as a woman later diagnosed with monkeypox have been offered the smallpox vaccine. The health care worker, reportedly from Fleetwood, is understood to have visited her doctor at Mountview Practice in Dock Street in the port town before being moved to the north east and quarantined.

She was the 3rd person to be diagnosed with the tropical disease in the UK, after treating the 2nd, who had recently visited Nigeria, at Blackpool Victoria Hospital. The 1st was a Nigerian resident staying at a naval base in Cornwall in an unconnected case, meaning the medic is thought to be the 1st to have actually caught monkeypox here.

One woman who attended an appointment at Mountview last Monday said she was contacted by Public Health England, with her and her young child later having a smallpox jab at the Victoria Hospital, where all staff have also been offered the vaccine in the hope it will lessen the impact of any further diagnoses. "We are adopting a highly precautionary approach to minimise the risk of additional cases and are tracing anyone who had contact with this individual during the 24 hours before they noticed a rash," Public Health England said in a statement last week. The government body yesterday [1 Oct 2018] refused to answer several questions or comment further.

Monkeypox is said to be caused by a virus and has initial symptoms of fever, headache, sore muscles, chills, and exhaustion. A rash then follows, usually developing 1st on the face before spreading to other parts of the body, while blisters and scabs also develop.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) described monkeypox as a "rare viral zoonotic disease" -- a virus given to humans by animals -- mostly found in "remote parks of central and west Africa, near tropical rainforests". It is similar to smallpox, a deadly disease eradicated in 1980, and, though much milder, it can also be fatal. Between one and 10 out of every 100 victims die, WHO said, "with most deaths occurring in younger age groups." None of the UK cases have been so serious. The United Nations agency added: "There is no specific treatment or vaccine available, although prior smallpox vaccination was highly effective in preventing monkeypox as well."

When the 1st 2 cases were announced, a hospital spokesman said there was "no further risk to other staff, patients, or visitors", though they did say the medics who treated the infected patients were being watched for signs of illness. Dr Nick Phin, deputy director of the National Infection Service, said it was "very unusual to see 2 cases in this short a period of time," but later said: "We have been actively monitoring contacts for 21 days after exposure to detect anyone presenting with an illness so they can be assessed quickly. "It is, therefore, not wholly unexpected a case has been identified."

All 3 people were undergoing treatment in isolation in different regions, the Vic patient at the Royal Liverpool University hospital, the medic at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle, and the naval base resident at the Royal Free Hospital in London. Last week, Public Health England said those who had not been contacted "did not need to be concerned", but conceded that a "significant" number of patients at the Blackpool Victoria Hospital may have been exposed to monkeypox. A spokeswoman did not provide even a rough figure, however.

Marie Thompson, the director of nursing at Blackpool Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, which runs the Vic, said staff were "working within the guidance of Public Health England." She added: "The staff member was picked up early and is getting quick treatment. We know monkeypox is a very rare disease. It is new to this country. This is a virus along the lines of having chickenpox. Symptoms are flu-like. You get a rash, but people recover within a few weeks."

An unnamed friend of the medic, who was quoted in a national newspaper, said: "She's in a lot of pain and has scabs on her face, up her nose, and over her body. She and her family are worried and distressed."

Dr Jeremy Farrar, director at biomedical research charity Wellcome, said: "That this 3rd case of monkeypox has been diagnosed now in a healthcare worker in the UK is worrying and an important reminder of the threat posed by infectious diseases in our connected world. Whilst cases of monkey pox are, thankfully, rare, it is an example of one of a number of diseases for which there is no approved vaccine or treatment. With proper infection control in place, the disease can be controlled and is usually self-limiting and currently poses a very low threat to the wider population. International borders present very little barrier for disease, and we must work together and support scientists and researchers wherever they are in the world to develop vaccines and treatments for the patients who need them the most in order to protect us all."

Professor Jonathan Ball, professor of molecular biology at the University of Nottingham, added: "The fact that only one of the 50 contacts of the initial monkeypox-infected patient has been infected shows how poorly infectious the virus is. It is wrong to think that we are on the brink of a nationwide outbreak. There are 2 main strains of virus: West African and Central African. Given that the 1st infected patient had travelled from Nigeria, it would be a reasonable guess that we are dealing with a West African strain, but this needs to be confirmed. The West African virus is associated with milder disease, fewer deaths, and limited human-to-human transmission. Patients usually clear the infection with relative ease within a few weeks," he said.

Monkeypox outbreaks have occurred since it was 1st diagnosed in 1970. A 9 year old boy became the 1st human to be diagnosed with monkeypox in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) in 1970. Since then, most cases have been in rural, rainforest regions of the Congo basin and western Africa, WHO said, particularly in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where it is endemic.

Monkeypox left Africa in early 2003, when cases were confirmed in the United States. "Most of the patients were reported to have had close contact with pet prairie dogs that were infected by African rodents that had been imported into the country [from Africa]," WHO added. Since 1970, cases have occurred in 10 African countries, and, last year [2017], Nigeria experienced its largest documented outbreak.

In Africa, human infections usually come from handling infected monkeys, giant rats, and squirrels, with rodents the most likely carrier. Eating poorly cooked meat of infected animals also carries a risk, said WHO. Human-to-human transmission comes from close contact with an infected patient or objects recently contaminated by them. "There is no evidence, to date, that person-to-person transmission alone can sustain monkeypox infections in the human population," WHO added.

A recent study of the prairie dog-to-human model found 2 strains of the virus: Congo basin and West African, with the former more virulent. The incubation period -- the time from infection until symptoms become apparent -- ranges from 5-21 days. The infection is split into 2 periods: The invasion period, which lasts around 5 days from infection and results in flu-type symptoms, and the skin eruption period, where various stages of rash break out, with small, fluid-filled blisters following. This lasts up to 3 weeks. The number of lesions can vary greatly, from a few to several thousand. Around a 3rd develop on the genitals.

There are no specific treatments or vaccines, though smallpox vaccinations are 85 per cent effective in preventing monkeypox and "will likely result in a milder disease course," WHO said. During outbreaks amongst humans, close contact with other patients is the "most significant risk factor," and "the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the virus. Surveillance measures and the rapid identification of new cases are critical for outbreak containment. Health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed monkeypox virus infection, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions."

A hospital spokesman said: "The safety and well-being of all our patients and staff are vitally important to us, and we ensure our staff have the training and equipment they need to do their jobs effectively. We have been speaking to staff to provide any further advice or reassurance where necessary."

[byline: Wes Holmes]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The above report provides additional details about the 3 cases and an overview of monkeypox and its clinical features. The previous report has good color photographs of the hand lesions that the health care worker developed (see Monkeypox - UK (04): ex Nigeria, more details 20180926.6053989).

The monkeypox virus clade circulating in Nigeria is the West Africa one, which has a very low to nil case fatality rate. As the above report suggests, this is likely the virus clade involved in these 3 cases. The central Africa clade is more virulent, with a case fatality rate of at least 10%.

Nigeria has had many monkeypox cases in 2017-2018 in several states. A recent ProMED-mail post of the situation report issued by the Nigeria CDC stated that a cluster of 6 suspected cases with epidemiological linkages to one of the cases in the UK has been identified in Rivers state and is being investigated in collaboration with the state team. In addition, 2 new confirmed cases have been recorded in Rivers that are not linked to the cluster described above (see Monkeypox - Africa (14): Nigeria 20180926.6053721).

Non-human primates are not a monkeypox virus reservoir. The main reservoirs of monkeypox virus are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ spp; an arboreal rodent, and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_). Some of these rodents are consumed as bushmeat. - Mod.TY

HealthMap/ProMED maps available at:
United Kingdom: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6069282,40
Nigeria: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6069282,62]
See Also
Monkeypox - UK (04): ex Nigeria, more details 20180926.6053989
Monkeypox - Africa (14): Nigeria 20180926.6053721
Monkeypox - UK (03): ex Nigeria, additional details 20180921.6043885
Monkeypox - Africa (13): Nigeria 20180913.6026151
Monkeypox - UK (02): ex Nigeria 20180911.6023180
Monkeypox - UK: ex Nigeria 20180908.6017005
Monkeypox - Africa (11): Nigeria (PL) 20180608.5847036
Monkeypox - Africa (06): Nigeria 20180405.5728330
Monkeypox - Africa (04) 20180327.5712702
.................................................sb/sh/ty/msp
</body>
