<header id=001993>
Published Date: 2011-11-19 05:34:02 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Diarrheal shellfish poisoning - France: 2009, mussels
Archive Number: 20111119.3410
</header>
<body id=001993>
DIARRHEAL SHELLFISH POISONING - FRANCE: 2009, MUSSELS
******************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 17 Nov 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 16, Issue 46 [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=3D20020


Food poisoning outbreaks linked to mussels
------------------------------------------
Diarrheic shellfish poisoning (DSP) is a gastrointestinal illness
caused by the consumption of shellfish contaminated with algal toxins
produced by marine dinoflagellates belonging to the genera
_Dinophysis_ spp. (_D. fortii_, _D. mitra_, _D. rotundata_, _D.
tripos_, _D. acuta_, _D. norvegica_ and _D. acuminata_) and
_Prorocentrum_ spp. (_P. lima_, _P. maculosum_, _P. concavum_, and _P.
hoffmannianum_) (1,2). The DSP toxins, including okadaic acid (OA) and
its analogues dinophysistoxin-1 (DTX-1), dinophysistoxin-2 (DTX-2) and
dinophysistoxin-3 (DTX-3), belong to the larger group of lipophilic
toxins which also includes the azaspiracid, yessotoxin and
pectenotoxin group toxins (3,4).

Since the discovery of DSP toxins in the late 1970s, DSP outbreaks
have been reported worldwide (5). To date, documented DSP cases
including an exposure estimate, i.e., with consumption and
contamination data collected at the same time, remain scarce. To a
certain extent, this may be due to underdiagnosis and/or
underreporting. Indeed, many consumers suffering from mild
gastrointestinal disorders do not consult a physician, and even if
they do so, physicians might fail to diagnose DSP, since
gastrointestinal symptoms are not specific. In July 2006, the European
Commission requested the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to
issue a scientific opinion assessing the current regulatory limits in
the European Union (EU) with regard to human health and analytical
methods for marine biotoxins. On 27 Nov 2007, the EFSA opinion on
okadaic acid and its analogues was adopted (6). Considering the acute
toxicity of OA-group toxins, the expert panel on contaminants in the
food chain decided to establish an acute reference dose (ARfD), which
represents the amount of a substance that can be ingested in a period
of 24 hours or less without appreciable health risk. The lowest
observable adverse effects level (LOAEL) deduced from available human
case reports was used to derive the ARfD. This LOAEL is about 50
microg OA equivalents (eq) per person, which approximates to 0.8
microg OA eq/kg bodyweight (bw) for a 60 kg adult. An uncertainty
factor of 3 was applied to extrapolate this LOAEL to a no observed
adverse effect level (NOAEL).

The panel considered that it was not necessary to apply an additional
uncertainty factor for the variation among humans as the data were
based on observations in several hundreds of affected shellfish
consumers, originating from various countries, and considered to
account for the most sensitive individuals (i.e. the young children
and elderly) (6,7). Finally, the ARfD was calculated by dividing the
LOAEL of about 0.8 microg OA eq/kg bw by the uncertainty factor of 3;
it resulted in an ARfD of 0.3 microg OA eq/kg bw. Based on the ARfD,
and assuming that this amount of toxin could be contained in a single
large portion of shellfish of 400 g, EFSA advised that a concentration
of 45 microg OA eq/kg shellfish flesh would not result in risks to the
consumer, whereas the EU limit is currently at 160 microg OA eq/kg
shellfish flesh (8).

The Panel noted however that information on the doses and profiles of
OA-related toxins provided in the majority of reports on DSP outbreaks
is very limited. Indeed, the toxin concentrations cannot be
unequivocally established, particularly if the tested shellfish are
not from the same batch as those consumed. Moreover, these studies
rarely provide precise information on the amount of contaminated
shellfish that has been consumed by intoxicated people.

In June 2009, 11 DSP outbreaks were reported in France within a few
days (from 3 to 9 Jun 2009), involving 45 individuals who had consumed
mussels. Following EFSA recommendations for detailed reports on
shellfish consumption and collection of reliable data on toxin content
in the event of DSP outbreaks (6), a thorough investigation of human
cases was conducted with the help of the stakeholders involved in the
French reporting system for food-borne disease outbreaks. Data on
epidemiology, mussel consumption, complete product traceback and toxin
content of the suspected mussel batch were examined for 3 of the 11
outbreaks. The aim of our study was to establish a dose-response
relationship by calculating the LOAEL from this case study and to
compare it to the one previously established by EFSA in 2006 (6).

Methods
-------
Food poisoning outbreaks associated with mussels: reporting and
investigation.
Notification of food-borne outbreaks has been mandatory in France
since 1987 (9). Food poisoning outbreaks are notified to the regional
public health authority and to the regional veterinary services and
forwarded to the Health Emergency Mission of the Ministry of
Agriculture. The regional veterinary services (Direction
Departementale de la Protection des Populations, DDPP) are in charge
of carrying out the food traceback investigation, withdrawing the
incriminated food from the market and destroying the contaminated
food. When shellfish are suspected of being contaminated, a sample is
sent to the national reference laboratory (NRL) for the control of
marine biotoxins of Maisons-Alfort for analysis. Regional veterinary
services report the results of their investigations to the regional
public health authorities which depend on the Ministry of Health. The
Ministry of Health, with support from the regional offices of the
National Institute for Public Health Surveillance (InVS), is in charge
of the epidemiological investigation

An outbreak is defined as an incident in which 2 or more cases had
shared a common meal. For this investigation, the meal should include
mussels. A case was defined as a patient with diarrhea, i.e., at least
3 liquid stools in a day after having consumed mussels, in the period
from 1 to 15 Jun 2009.

Analysis of lipophilic toxins (okadaic acid and dinophysistoxins)
-----------------------------------------------------------------
A 10 kg shellfish sample from the same batch as the one suspected to
be involved in 3 outbreaks was collected by the DDPP of the department
Morbihan and sent to NRL for the control of marine biotoxins of
Maisons-Alfort for analysis of lipophilic toxins. A homogenate of the
digestive glands of mussels was analysed by the mouse bioassay (MBA)
described by Yasumoto et al (3) to determine DSP toxicity according to
EU Regulation 2074/2005/EC (10). The MBA measures the total toxicity
based on the biological response of the animals to the toxins. In
order to determine the toxin profile of the sample, an in-house liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) validated test,
based on a method developed by McKenzie et al (11) and further adapted
by the European Union Reference Laboratory (12), was used as an
additional test to investigate these outbreaks. The LC-MS/MS analysis
specifically detects, identifies and quantifies OA and its
dinophysistoxins, as well as other lipophilic toxin groups for which a
toxin standard per group is available (i.e., pectenotoxins,
azaspiracids, yessotoxins, gymnodimine, spirolides). It became the
reference method in the EU on 1 Jul 2011 (13).

Results
-------
From 1 to 9 Jun 2009, 11 outbreaks involving a total of 45 individuals
were reported through the food-borne outbreak reporting system in 3
departments of western France: Morbihan, Loire Atlantique and Gironde
The investigation revealed that all of the intoxicated people had
consumed mussels harvested from a production area (Vilaine bay)
located in Morbihan, Brittany, between 29 May and 3 Jun 2009. They
suffered from diarrhea, i.e., at least 3 liquid stools in a day, in
some cases accompanied with abdominal cramps, as well as nausea and
vomiting. In one case, fever (greater than 37 degrees C) was also
reported. The onset of symptoms ranged from 3 to 20 hours after
consuming the mussels and recovery time was 1 to 4 days.

Shellfish traceback
------------------
The traceback investigation showed that outbreaks 1, 2 and 3,
involving at least 18 individuals in the department Morbihan, were
linked to a single batch of mussels from the Vilaine Bay. In this bay,
a high risk period for _Dinophysis_ has been defined between May and
August (14). During this period, both water and shellfish are sampled
on a weekly basis, i.e., each Monday or Tuesday depending on the tide,
at 5 pre-defined sampling points for shellfish and 6 points for water.
The MBA results are available by the end of the week, on Thursday or
Friday, and communicated without delay to the local authorities for a
decision on whether to open or close the harvesting areas.

The harvested mussels incriminated in the 3 outbreaks came from an
area where the presence of toxic dinoflagellates _Dinophysis_ spp. was
detected from mid-May 2009 during the routine phytoplankton
monitoring, but the weekly MBA were negative. Thus, the area remained
open when 210 kg of mussels were harvested on 1 Jun 2009. Shellfish
harvesting in the area was suspended on 3 June when the outbreaks
became known. On 4 Jun 2011, the area was closed when the MBA result
from that week showed a positive result. The distribution of the
contaminated batch of mussels is described in Figure 3 [For figures
see original URL - Mod.LL]. The batch of 210 kg was separated into 2
parts: 10 kg were sold to a family (Outbreak 1) and 200 kg were sold
to a dispatch centre. Of these 200 kg, 50 kg were sold to Restaurant A
(Outbreak 2), 40 kg were sold to a family (Outbreak 3) and 10 kg were
sold to Restaurant B. After notification of the outbreaks, the
dispatch centre destroyed the remaining 100 kg. The 10 kg sample
distributed to Restaurant B was not consumed and was sent to the NRL
for the control of marine biotoxins of Maisons-Alfort for analysis. As
the presence of toxic dinoflagellate _Dinophysis_ spp. in the water
had been detected during the routine phytoplankton monitoring, the
sample was initially screened for OA and dinophysistoxins.

Epidemiological and consumption data
------------------------------------
The age of the cases ranged from 11 to 65 years (mean age: 39.5 years)
and their weights ranged from 38 to 95 kg (mean weight: 63 kg). The
mean weight observed in this case study was close to the 60 kg body
weight frequently used in risk assessment studies. Most of the
intoxicated individuals were women (9/13). The reported symptoms
included abdominal cramps and diarrhoea (13/13), nausea (8/13),
vomiting (5/13) and fever (1/13). The symptoms occurred between 3 and
15 hours after shellfish consumption. In most cases, symptoms resolved
1 to 4 days after consumption. None of the people were hospitalized.
Quantities of mussel consumption were reported for 11 of 18
individuals, with the reported amounts varying from 150 to 900 g.

Content of lipophilic toxins in the suspected batch of mussels
--------------------------------------------------------------
The sample of mussels from the batch suspected to be involved in
Outbreaks 1, 2 and 3 tested positive in the MBA indicating the
presence of DSP toxins at a concentration higher than the regulatory
limit of 160 microg OA eq/kg shellfish flesh. The 3 mice tested died
respectively in 47, 49 and 56 minutes. They exhibited symptoms typical
of the OA group of toxins i.e., apathy, general weakness, difficulty
to move, spasms, respiratory distress and death. The analysis of the
sample by the informative LC-MS/MS method showed that it contained 681
microg of free OA/kg and 580 microg of DTX-3/kg. Hydrolysis of DTX3
toxins (esterified forms of parent toxins, which can be OA, DTX1 or
DTX2) gave free OA only. As indicated in the scientific opinion
document by EFSA, the toxicity equivalence factor (TEF) values for
DTX3 are equal to those of the corresponding unesterified toxins (6).
Consequently, the total concentration of OA was calculated at 1261
microg OA eq/kg shellfish flesh, which is approximately 8 times higher
than the European regulatory limit for OA group toxins. This high
concentration explains the very short survival time of the mice and
the rapid appearance of the symptoms following the consumption of the
mussels by those who had been intoxicated.

Discussion
--------
From 1 to 9 Jun 2009, 11 DSP outbreaks involving a total of 45
individuals were reported. In comparison, a single DSP outbreak
involving 2 individuals was confirmed in 2006, 7 outbreaks involving
109 individuals in 2007, and none in 2008 (15). These outbreaks had
been caused either by French mussels contaminated with OA group toxins
or by Irish mussels contaminated with azaspiracides. As was the case
in June 2009, most of these earlier DSP outbreaks occurred within a
period of a few days because the regional veterinary services of the
Ministry of Agriculture had withdrawn the incriminated food from the
market and closed the production area following the results of the
traceback investigation. If the shellfish are exchanged or exported,
the Health Emergency Mission of the Ministry of Agriculture
immediately notifies the European Commission using the Rapid Alert
System for Food and Feed (RASFF). The goal of the notification is to
give all RASFF members the information so that they can confirm
whether the product in question is on their market and take the
necessary measures. In the case of the DSP outbreaks in June 2009, no
RASFF alert was issued since the contaminated shellfish were only
distributed on French territory. The production area was closed by
prefectoral order on 3 Jun 2011 when the 1st 3 outbreaks were
reported, and the suppliers and consumers were informed immediately in
order to withdraw and/or recall the unconsumed shellfish.

The described outbreaks were the result of an unusually rapid
shellfish contamination, occurring within a week in which _Dinophysis_
density increased by a factor of 5 in the harvesting area, quickly
contaminating the mussels with a high toxin level. At the time of the
outbreaks, the MBA was used for monitoring DSP toxins in shellfish;
the result of the weekly test performed on the mussel sample harvested
on 25 May 2009 was found negative on 29 May 2009, whereas the result
of the test on sample harvested on 1 Jun 2009 was found positive on 4
Jun 2009.

The occurrence of these outbreaks demonstrates that even if an
efficient monitoring system is in place, rapid shellfish contamination
may appear suddenly and cause health problems. The following factors
could be responsible for the failure of the monitoring system to
detect the contamination: the level of contamination of the sample
harvested on 25 May 2009 may not have been representative of the
contamination within the production area due to heterogeneity, and the
MBA may have suffered from a lack of sensitivity for this sample (6).
This sudden toxic event could have been prevented by increasing the
frequency of the sampling and/or the number of sampling points and/or
by a quantitative method to follow the increase of the toxins content
in shellfish. The implementation of the LC-MS/MS method as the
reference method for monitoring lipophilic toxins (11) will make such
quantification possible, and preventive actions can be taken to avoid
the harvesting of shellfish in areas where a toxic episode is likely
to occur.

Information in reports of DSP outbreaks rarely provide data on the
actual quantities of toxin ingested by the intoxicated individuals
since the tested shellfish samples often come from a batch different
from the one consumed. Based on the concentration and consumption data
detailed here, the minimum amount of OA causing symptoms was estimated
for 11 intoxicated individuals involved in 3 of the 11 reported
outbreaks. It was possible to deduce a LOAEL from this study. The 10
kg of mussels, from the same batch as the one involved in the 3
outbreaks, represented 2.4 kg of raw flesh, thus the flesh/whole
shellfish ratio was estimated to be 24 percent. Although the flesh
ratio varies from batch to batch, the value of 24 percent is
consistent with information released by the Food Safety Authority of
Ireland (18-24 percent) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (24 percent) [16,17].

In the outbreaks described here, the portion size ranged from 150 to
900 g of mussels, which translates to 36 to 216 g of mussel flesh.
This is consistent with the data provided by the EU Member States to
EFSA and the information included in EFSA's comprehensive database
indicating that a portion size of 400 g of shellfish flesh has been
identified as an appropriate estimate of a large portion (18).

Given that the toxin concentration in the incriminated batch was 1261
microg OA eq/kg mussel flesh and that DSP symptoms were observed after
consuming 36 to 216 g of mussel flesh, the toxin intake inducing
symptoms in the intoxicated individuals ranged from 45 to 272 microg
OA eq. The lowest toxin intake referred to 2 persons with a bodyweight
of 38 and 58 kg, respectively. It corresponds to 1.2 microg and 0.8 mu
g microg OA eq/kg body weight, respectively. Therefore, the LOAEL
deduced from our study was 45 microg OA eq/person or 0.8 mu g OA eq/kg
body weight for the most sensitive person.

Finally, the data collected in our study, although based on a limited
number of individuals, support the LOAEL for human illness of
approximately 50 microg OA eq/person or 0.8 microg OA eq/kg body
weight for a 60 kg adult established by the EFSA in 2006 (6).

[References available at original URL - Mod.LL]

[Byline: Hossen V, Jourdan-da Silva N, Guillois-Becel Y, Marchal J,
Krys S]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Although these outbreaks occurred in 2009, the posting reveals how
even an aggressive screening program to prevent diarrheal shellfish
poisoning can be outflanked (or perhaps "outplanked") by a rapid
growth of the phytoplankton producing the DSP toxin. The illness
caused by the toxin resembles viral gastrointestinal disease so that
cases can be easily underreported. Tracking any implicated shellfish
from harvesting until ingestion is necessary to find additional cases.
Mussels are generally fully cooked before eating as opposed to clams
and oysters that are often consumed raw but the toxins involved in the
pathogenesis of DSP are heat-stable. - Mod.LL]
See Also
Diarrheal shellfish poisoning - Canada (02): mussels 20110829.2648
Diarrheal shellfish poisoning - Canada: alert, recall 20110807.2393
Red tide, shellfish - USA: (MA) alert 20110506.1400
2010
---
Paralytic shellfish poisoning - USA: (ME) warning 20100714.2353
2007
---
Paralytic shellfish poisoning, human - USA (ME) 20070802.2508
.................................................ll/ejp/mpp
</body>
