<header id=033189>
Published Date: 2012-04-29 13:40:37 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Paramyxoviruses, mammal, bat origin
Archive Number: 20120429.1117864
</header>
<body id=033189>
PARAMYXOVIRUSES, MAMMAL, BAT ORIGIN
***********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 27 Apr 2012
Source: Science 2.0 [edited]
http://www.science20.com/news_articles/bats_gave_us_mumps_multiple_infectious_agents_discovered_virus_reservoir-89506


Bats gave us mumps: multiple infectious agents discovered in "virus reservoir"
---------------------------------------------------------
Researchers have discovered the probable cause of several infectious agents at the same time. Paramyxoviruses originate from bats and from there the pathogens have spread to humans and other mammals. In total, the new study tested 9278 animals for viruses, among them 86 species of bats and 33 rodent species, leading to the discovery of an enormous number of new virus species. This could make eradicating many dangerous diseases significantly more difficult than had been thought. For bats provide a reservoir from which viruses could come back after vaccination campaigns. "We already knew from prior studies that bats and rodents play a role as carriers of paramyxoviruses," said Prof Dr Christian Drosten, head of the Institute for Virology at the Universitätsklinikum Bonn. The many varied members of this large virus family cause -- for example, measles, mumps, pneumonias, and colds. The highly dangerous Hendra and Nipah viruses cause types of encephalitis that result in death for one out of two patients. Paramyxoviruses also play a role in veterinary medicine, causing -- for example, canine distemper or rinderpest [now believed to have been eradicated]. With support from numerous scientific institutes in Germany and around the world, researchers tested a total of 9278 animals from Europe, South America, and Asia, including 86 bat and 33 rodent species. "These animals live in very large social communities with millions of individuals in some cases. Their close contact promotes mutual infection and provides for great variety in circulating viruses." Using molecular biology methods, the scientists identified which virus species are rampant in bats and rodents. According to their own estimates, they discovered more than 60 new paramyxovirus species. "That is about as many as the number that was already known," said Drosten.

Bats are the original paramyxovirus hosts
-----------------------------------------
Using computational biology methods, the scientists calculated a common evolutionary tree for the new and the known viruses. They then deduced, using mathematical methods, in which host animals the viruses have most likely taken up residence during their evolutionary history. "Our analysis shows that almost all of the forebears of today's paramyxoviruses have existed in bats," explained Prof Drosten. "Just as with influenza, where we are keeping an eye on birds as a source of new pandemic viruses, we will now have to study the bat viruses to see if they are a danger to humans." So, the current data might play a useful role in early detection and prevention of epidemics -- a major new goal in virus research.

Mumps viruses have jumped to humans
-----------------------------------
The findings also included that the Hendra and Nipah viruses that cause encephalitis in Asia and Australia really came from Africa. "This results in an urgent need to conduct medical studies in Africa," said the Bonn virologist, adding that many disease cases on this continent remain unexplained and might possibly have been caused by such new viruses. In one case, the scientists have already found proof that bat viruses transfer directly to humans. "Our data show that the human mumps virus comes directly from bats ­and can be found there to this day," reported Drosten.

These results indicate that it may not be as easy to eradicate dangerous viruses as had been assumed. For eliminating an infectious agent permanently from the population by means of vaccination requires that there are no animal hosts from which a new infection might come. "In bats, we assume that there is a vast reservoir of such agents," said Drosten. "If the vaccination campaigns are stopped once a virus has been eradicated, this might present a potential risk -- maybe we will have to rethink." This is why he advocates taking into account ecological data when planning vaccination campaigns. Eradicating bats or other wild animals would be neither possible nor sensible. "Bats and other small wild mammals are of immeasurable value for our planet's ecosystems."

--
communicated by:
Thomas James Allen <tjallen@pipeline.com>

[These findings are surprising and challenging for both epidemiologists and virologists. The association of many members of the virus family _Paramyxoviridae_, both viruses of humans and other terrestrial animals with bats is surprising and unexpected. Interested readers are recommended to consult the full text of this remarkable investigation. Below are extracts from the paper by Drexler and colleagues - Mod.CP]

******
[2]
Date: Tue 24 Apr 2201
Source: Nature Communications 3, Article number: 796 [abridged & edited - mod.CP]
http://www.nature.com/ncomms/journal/v3/n4/full/ncomms1796.html


Bats host major mammalian paramyxoviruses
-----------------------------------------
By Jan Felix Drexler and others. To view the full text, extensive graphical data, and the literature cited, readers should consult the original text which can be downloaded from the Nature website without charge via the source URL.

Abstract
--------
The large virus family _Paramyxoviridae_ includes some of the most significant human and livestock viruses, such as measles-, distemper-, mumps-, parainfluenza-, Newcastle disease-, respiratory syncytial and metapneumoviruses. [And the recently eradicated Rinderpest virus. - Mod.CP] Here we identify an estimated 66 new paramyxoviruses in a worldwide sample of 119 bat and rodent species (9278 individuals). Major discoveries include evidence of an origin of Hendra- and Nipah virus in Africa, identification of a bat virus conspecific with the human mumps virus, detection of close relatives of respiratory syncytial virus, mouse pneumonia- and canine distemper virus in bats, as well as direct evidence of Sendai virus in rodents. Phylogenetic reconstruction of host associations suggests a predominance of host switches from bats to other mammals and birds. Hypothesis tests in a maximum likelihood framework permit the phylogenetic placement of bats as tentative hosts at ancestral nodes to both the major members of the _Paramyxoviridae_ subfamilies (_Paramyxovirinae_ and _Pneumovirinae_). Future attempts to predict the emergence of novel paramyxoviruses in humans and livestock will have to rely fundamentally on these data.

Introduction
------------
The ability to predict and prevent viral epidemics has become a major objective in the public health disciplines. Knowledge of viral hosts enables the identification of maintenance populations from which epidemics may emerge 1-4. From an ecological perspective, the natural host of a given virus may be regarded as its habitat 5,6. Unfortunately, unbiased assessment of habitat is impossible, as it requires the investigation of all host species in all possible geographical locations. Moreover, the delimitations of viral species and populations are often not well defined. However, viral phylogenies can identify whether extant viruses encountered in a given host are less or more directly linked to common ancestors, providing clues to virus origins 4-6.

Hosts of relevant infectious disease agents share distinctive properties that can be summarised into a cumulative definition of animal reservoirs (AR) as of interest in public health. We define as ARs those taxa of extant animals that contain higher genetic virus diversity than target taxa, harbour the virus continuously on the level of social groups (with or without disease) 4,7, and are naturally infected beyond the geographical limits of communicating social groups 3,4. These cumulative parameters are amenable to field investigations, without the requirement to manipulate wild animals and their habitats extensively. Nevertheless, logistical, ethical and ecological limits in field investigations still require a focussing on appropriate candidate taxa. Here, it is helpful to consider that the potential of animals to act as AR can be linked to social and behavioural parameters, which in turn are inherent to taxa. Virus transmission and maintenance is generally favoured by large social groups, close social interaction, high population densities, as well as spatial mobility and fast population turnover 2,4,8. It is also helpful to consider that genetic proximity between species is favourable of cross-species pathogen transmission 6,9-11. For instance, all cumulative criteria are met by the best studied of relationships between a virus genus and its AR, the influenza A virus in waterfowl 3,9,10.

In applying the above considerations to larger taxa of mammalian viruses, such as the members of the mammalian paramyxoviruses (PVs), mammals come into focus as potential AR. In mammals, the criterion of large natural group sizes is particularly met by species within the orders _Chiroptera (bats) and _Rodentia_(rodents) 1,8. Indeed, sporadic detection of PV in members of both orders has been previously reported by us and other groups 12-16. Here we tested 119 bat and rodent species worldwide, and identified a large range of novel PV related to major pathogens. These included very large diversities of henipa- and rubulaviruses, as well as relatives of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), mouse pneumonia- and canine distemper virus in bats. Multiple morbilli-related viruses were found in bats and rodents. These data will change our conception of PV host associations and influence future attempts to assess and predict epidemic risks.

Results
-------
PV detection in small mammals:

To assess the spectrum of PV in bats and rodents, 86 species of bats (4954 individuals) and 33 species of rodents (4324 individuals) were sampled in 15 locations worldwide (fig. 1, table 1, and supplementary table S1). All samples were screened for _Paramyxoviridae_ by various reverse transcription (RT)–PCR assays. Pooled serum samples were additionally screened by random amplification and deep sequencing of serum-derived cDNA. Although this approach identified a range of viruses whose full genomes remain to be determined, no PVs were detected (supplementary table S2). This was presumably due to higher concentrations of the identified viruses in blood, or because of properties that technically promote detection by random amplification, such as circularity of DNA genomes. In contrast, RT–PCR detected a large range of PV cDNA sequences as described below.

Phylogenies were inferred using maximum likelihood and Bayesian approaches (fig. 2a–e and supplementary fig. S1). Detection rates of viruses in bats and rodents were similar at 3.3 per cent and 3.1 per cent, respectively, but bat viruses were dispersed across the phylogenetic tree with pronounced genetic divergence, whereas rodent viruses belonged to three clades with relatively low divergence that were not exclusively detected in rodents (supplementary fig. S1). PVs were detected in six of ten families of bats tested, representing all major chiropteran phylogenetic lineages (fig. 3a,b). A simplified criterion based on pairwise amino acid distance matrices was used to estimate how many novel virus species might have been detected (refer to Methods section). In total, 66 novel PV taxa at the level of putative [viral] species were discernible. This number exceeded the number of PV species currently known, as the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) currently lists 36 species, and even upon inclusion of unclassified sequences from GenBank, only an estimated 57 species can be discerned.

Major PV genera in bats:

The genus _Rubulavirus_ contains three human pathogens, mumps virus, as well as the respiratory viruses,P arainfluenzavirus 2 and 4. A large range of novel rubulaviruses in fruit- and insect-eating African bats were identified in addition to those six bat rubulaviruses previously known (fig. 2a, supplementary table S1). The viruses could be classified into 21 discernible taxonomic entities on the level of putative species. No rubulaviruses were detected in rodents. A bat virus of high similarity to mumps virus was fully sequenced from a bat spleen (15,378 nucleotides, (supplementary fig. S2)). Amino acid similarity was well above 90 per cent in all genes except P (89.5 per cent), suggesting this virus and human mumps to be conspecific. To determine antigenic relatedness to human mumps virus, sera from 52 flying foxes and 78 insect-eating bats were tested by immunofluorescence (n=26 Eidolon helvum, 5 Epomops franqueti, 5 Micropterus pusillus, 5 Myonycteris torquata, 11 Rousettus aegyptiacus, 14 Coleura afra, 21 Hipposideros cf. caffer, 11 Hipposideros gigas, 17Miniopterus inflatus, 11 Rhinolophus cf. alcyone). Clear reactivity was observed in 41.5 per cent of the 130 tested bat sera (fig. 4a). Specificity of these reactivities was confirmed by cross-testing against other PVs, including the rubulavirus Parainfluenzavirus 2 (fig. 4b). These data in total suggest that mumps and related bat viruses may belong to one same serogroup.

Measles is one of the most important childhood diseases. Measles virus defines the genus _Morbillivirus_ that also contains the canine and phocine distemper virus, a dolphin morbillivirus, as well as Rinderpest and Peste Des Petits Ruminants viruses. Novel members of the genus _Morbillivirus _as currently defined by the ICTV were detected for the first time in bats (neotropical vampire bats) but not in rodents (fig. 2b). A clade of morbillivirus-related rodent- and tupaia viruses, forming an unclassified sister clade to the genus _Morbillivirus_, was extended by an estimated 25 novel bat and rodent viruses, confirming the unclassified genus and the _Morbillivirus genus_ to form a major stem lineage of PV.

The genus _Henipavirus_ comprises two known virus species causing fatal encephalitis in humans. These viruses (Hendra virus (HeV) in Australia, Nipah virus (NiV) in Asia) have been sporadically acquired from bats of the _Pteropus_ genus by humans, swine and horses. We have recently detected small sequence fragments of potentially related viruses in a colony of _E. helvum_ fruit bats in Ghana 12. The present data identify at least 23 distinct viral clades in phylogenetic relation to henipaviruses in six bat species sampled in five different African countries (fig. 2c). On the basis of the minimal genetic distance between HeV and NiV (7 per cent in the analysed L-gene fragment), the African viruses were estimated to pertain to 19 novel virus species in the genus Henipavirus (figs 2c and 5). Full genome sequencing of a representative virus (GH-M74a) from a bat spleen confirmed formal classification in the genus _Henipavirus_ (18 530 nucleotides, (supplementary fig. S3)). It was noted that the RdRp gene of the analysed African virus contained the catalytic motif GDNQ, as typical of the order _Mononegavirales_, whereas HeV and NiV have an atypical GDNE motif. Sequencing of this motif in representatives of all major African virus clades also yielded GDNQ, supporting the idea that African rather than Asian viruses are identical to generic ancestors in this highly conserved motif. In addition, the GDNE signature typical of HeV and NiV was found in a small fraction of African viruses, and these were in closest phylogenetic relationship to HeV and NiV (fig. 2c). The most parsimonious explanation for the diversion of signatures in this highly conserved motif was a single change in a common ancestor to the GDNE-containing clade, as opposed to hypothetical convergent acquisitions of GDNQ in all but one of the parallel lineages. The GDNE-ancestral virus would most likely have existed in Africa, and would have been ancestral to HeV and NiV as well.

Close relatedness between NiV and these African viruses was also demonstrated by immunofluorescence staining. To this end, Vero cells were infected in a biosafety level 4 laboratory with NiV and incubated with serum from _E. helvum_ before staining with a polyclonal anti-bat antibody. Clear reactivity was seen (fig. 4c). In two different widely distributed species of New World bats, one frugivorous (_Carollia perspicillata_, rate 0.5 per cent) and one insectivorous (_Pteronotus parnellii_, rate 7.5 per cent), we identified virus sequences that were phylogenetically closely related to the genus _Henipavirus_ (area of distribution shown in supplementary fig. S4). These viruses formed a sister clade to the genus _Henipavirus,_ including its novel African representatives (figs 2c and 5a). It was impossible for ethical and logistical reasons to euthanise Neotropical bats and sample internal organs that might have enabled the completion of full genome sequences. Nevertheless, the N protein gene at the far opposite end of the genome of one of these viruses was successfully sequenced from a faecal sample. RdRp- and N-gene fragments were phylogenetically congruent and no signs of genomic recombination were seen (fig. 5b).

RSV and the related human metapneumovirus, belonging to the _Pneumovirinae_ subfamily, are the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in children worldwide. We identified a clade of novel bat viruses also in this subfamily, which formed a sister clade to the human and bovine RSV (fig. 2d). No bat viruses were detected in direct relationship to the genus _Metapneumovirus_, whose only human member, the human metapneumovirus, is most closely related to avian metapneumovirus C. These data support the notion that the metapneumoviruses are of direct avian, rather than direct mammalian descent 17.

Sendai virus, a member of the genus _Respirovirus_, was detected in wild rodents from Thailand (fig. 2e), confirming this virus not to be restricted to laboratory animals. No viruses belonging to this genus were detected in bats, but bat sera were found to react with respirovirus antigens (fig. 4b), supporting previous assumptions that bats should carry closely related viruses 18.

Natural history of infection:

To compare organ-specific compartments of PV replication, virus concentrations in internal organs were determined in 22 African _E. helvum_ bats infected with henipaviruses. The spleens of 21 of 22 animals tested positive with high virus concentrations, whereas all other internal organs as well as blood yielded virus at lower rates and concentrations (fig. 4d). Organ distribution of morbilli-related PV in 28 rodents was strikingly different from that in bats, with broader and less organ-specific distribution of virus. Highest viral loads and most frequent virus detections in rodents were seen in the kidneys, and in bats in the spleens (supplementary fig. S5, supplementary tables S3 and S4).

We next looked for evidence of continuous virus excretion on population level in bats 7. A colony of _Myotis myotis_ in Germany known to carry members of the Morbillivirus-related clade was monitored over 3 years for shedding of virus. Shedding rates and concentrations were constant over three observation periods throughout 2008 to 2010 (fig. 6). This colony was a maternity colony, and parturition times fell in the middle of observation periods but did not influence excretion, suggesting natural infection with little differences in shedding between young and adult animals. It was noted that this pattern was very different from that of measles virus in humans 19,20.

Interestingly, the morbilli-related viruses from _M. myotis_ in Germany were also observed in genetically distant Coleura afra bats in Ghana. For several other PV clades, evidence of their association with bats beyond the limits of communicating social groups was obtained, as summarised in figs 7a and b. One pneumovirus, six henipaviruses and eight rubulaviruses were detected throughout several sampling years and sites across four different Western and Central African countries. Notably, widespread and constant detection of several viruses was observed in cave-roosting _Rousettus aegyptiacus_ that do not participate in annual migrations and whose populations are isolated from each other (fig. 7c).

To identify signs of PV-dependent disease in bats, paramount serum chemistry parameters were compared between infected and non-infected bats. No infection-dependent alterations were seen in concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase, gamma glutamyltransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine transferase, bilirubin and albumin (supplementary table S5). In summary, bats show an overwhelming PV diversity, continuous PV shedding without evidence of efficient immune control, signs of organ-specific replication and absence of PV-related pathogenicity. It was noted that these traits taken together are typical of viral ARs.

Discussion (abbreviated)
------------------------
Beyond virus evolution and ecology, these data might have important implications for public health. HeV and NiV may be of African descent and have highly diversified relatives in Africa. These viruses might be associated with unrecognised disease, given the tremendous number of unresolved cases of encephalitis often ascribed to malaria in Africa 47. Observed patterns of viral loads suggest that virus could be acquired during slaughtering of bats for alimentary purposes 48, but possibly also through contact with ubiquitous bat faeces (supplementary tables S3 and S8). It is for this same reason that the significance of Henipavirus-related agents in widely distributed bats in America deserves urgent further investigation. Moreover, the finding of agents serologically related to eradicable viruses, such as mumps, distemper and measles virus, is highly relevant in assessing perspectives and consequences of virus eradication 19,49,50,51. Clearly, the bats investigated in this study carried viruses that were only similar but not identical to those agents endemic in humans or livestock. These new data therefore emphasise the importance of investigating possible transmission chains, as exemplified by the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome, in which an agent derived from bats was probably passed to humans by intermediate hosts such as carnivores52. In the case of the mumps-related bat virus, a direct antigenic relatedness between human and bat viruses has been confirmed, and the close genetic proximity between both viruses suggests that even cross-neutralisation might be possible. In light of the still narrow representation of genetic diversity of bats covered in this study (ca. 7.5 per cent of bat species), further research might reveal further batborne PV in close relationship to known pathogens of humans and livestock. If antigenic overlap exists, this could become relevant for virus eradication concepts. Relevant antigenic overlap would be defined by proof of cross-neutralisation between reservoirborne and human or livestock pathogens. In this latter case, elimination of circulating virus and the subsequent cessation of vaccination might leave humans or livestock susceptible for reservoir-borne, antigenetically related viruses.

Although these data identify a potential reservoir of important mammalian viruses, we can only begin to understand their true significance by functional investigation. Knowledge on the genetic range of pathogens carried by speciose small mammals may enable early recognition of zoonotic epidemics and rapid decision-making in the public health sector53, 54. However, much more (and different) work needs to be done to actually assess and ameliorate zoonotic risks. The most relevant provision in this field is that epidemic risks emanating from wildlife virus reservoirs should trigger wildlife conservation rather than interference with wild animal populations.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[There is something for every epidemiologist and midrobiologist in this exhaustive study. For me, in the past a minor player in this field, an interesting minor conclusion is that the human metapneumovirus originated by avian rather than mammalian descent. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2010
---
Hepatitis C-related virus, bats - Bangladesh 20100702.2206
Ebolavirus, bats - Spain (02): (AS), clarification 20100505.1451
Ebolavirus, bats - Spain: (AS) RFI 20100502.1428
2008
---
Astroviruses, insectivorous bats 20080927.3062
2006
---
Undiagnosed disease, short-tailed bats - New Zealand 20060902.2507
.................................................cp/sh
</body>
