<header id=060221>
Published Date: 2013-06-15 12:55:22 EDT
Subject: PRO> Chemical weapons - Syria (05): sarin
Archive Number: 20130615.1774393
</header>
<body id=060221>
CHEMICAL WEAPONS - SYRIA (05): SARIN
************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 14 Jun 2013
Source: New Scientist [edited]
http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn23704-syria-has-crossed-chemical-red-line-says-obama.html#.ubtiqee-2S0


The US government has "high confidence" that the Syrian government has used chemical weapons (CW). In an apparent policy shift, it says it will now provide military support to Syrian rebels. The decision follows the finding of a breakdown product of the nerve gas sarin in urine samples from Syria.

"The Assad regime has used chemical weapons, including the nerve agent sarin, on a small scale against the opposition multiple times in the last year," declared a White House statement released yesterday [13 Jun 2013]. At least 100 to 150 people were killed as a consequence, it said.

Although that accounts for only a small fraction of the 90 000-plus deaths in the Syrian conflict so far, the statement said "the use of chemical weapons violates international norms and crosses clear red lines that have existed within the international community for decades". Since last August [2012], US President Barack Obama has said CW would "change his calculus" on US involvement in Syria.

That has now happened: the statement promises more "non-lethal assistance" for the rebels -- which could include medical and communications equipment, for example -- and "direct support" for their Supreme Military Council.

"That includes military support," US deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes told journalists. This was not mentioned in the statement.

The US government declared in April [2013] that it suspected Syria had used CW, based partly on "physiological samples" from injured rebels. Since then, more samples have come to light.

Positive test
-------------
Last week, 2 reporters for the French newspaper Le Monde announced that 2 urine samples they smuggled out of Syria had been tested by the French Centre for Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Defence south of Paris and found to contain isopropyl methylphosphonic acid. That is sarin with a fluoride ion removed by chemical breakdown in the body, says Alastair Hay at the University of Leeds, UK, a leading CW expert. "It can only come from sarin." Blood and urine retain traces of sarin exposure for up to 6 weeks, he says.

Moreover, Le Monde said blood samples smuggled by "other channels" from a battle at Saraqeb in northern Syria, where munitions and injuries suggested some kind of CW, contained 9.5 nanograms of sarin itself per millilitre. French and British officials declared last week they believed Syria had used sarin.

Such results do not indicate who released the sarin, notes the US statement, repeating calls for UN verification inside Syria. The statement said it had "no reliable, corroborated" evidence that the rebels had CW, however, and did have reports of "Syrian officials planning and executing regime chemical weapons attacks".

Small-scale use
---------------
It also said reports of symptoms in Syria were consistent with sarin exposure. CW experts have been dubious about this. Videos of what are purported to be victims of CW exposure show limited effects, with few people affected, mixed symptoms and no contamination of unprotected carers. Now it seems possible that small amounts of sarin may have been used, perhaps alongside other CW, to create just such uncertainty. The French lab did not test for other agents such as tear gas.

"The estimated 100 to 150 fatalities would indicate very small-scale use," says Richard Guthrie, a CW expert formerly with the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute in Sweden. It is not clear, he says, why commanders would risk global censure in return for the uncertain military advantage that small amounts of sarin might give them. Release could have been accidental or not approved by Damascus -- or attackers might have used sarin alongside other agents. "That would provide a confusing situation," says Guthrie, making it hard to prove CW use.

"The lack of bodies could be due to a whole range of factors such as the quantity used, number of people, [location of] buildings and wind direction," cautions Hay. "Even if only 50 per cent pure, sarin is so potent that you are still going to get some effect."

The White House statement says the US is "working with allies to present a credible, evidentiary case to share with the international community and the public".

[byline: Debora MacKenzie]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Thu 13 Jun 2013
Source: The Washington Post [edited]
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/2013/06/13/the-u-s-says-syria-has-used-chemical-weapons-now-what/


Obama administration officials say they've concluded that forces loyal to Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad have used chemical weapons as part of the now 2-year conflict, including sarin gas, which is particularly horrific.

President Obama has long called the use of chemical weapons a red line for the United States. But he has been remarkably vague about what crossing that red line would mean, stating only that it would be a "game changer" and that the US would press for United Nations action.

Although the Obama administration has emphasized the red line against chemical weapons use, and although the international norm against their use carries grave importance far beyond this one war, it's not clear that this revelation will necessarily trigger much of a change in US policy.

Ben Rhodes, the White House deputy national security adviser, put out a statement articulating how US policy would change in response to the conclusion of chemical weapons use. He added later that the US would commit military support to some rebels. Although this does upgrade the current US policy from just offering the rebels non-lethal assistance -- which means stuff like communications gear or medical supplies but not guns -- it stops short of the no-fly zone proposed by the US military.

The President has said that the use of chemical weapons would change his calculus, and it has. Our decision making has already been guided by the April [2013] intelligence assessment and by the regime's escalation of horrific violence against its citizens.

Following on the credible evidence that the regime has used chemical weapons against the Syrian people, the President has augmented the provision of non-lethal assistance to the civilian opposition, and also authorized the expansion of our assistance to the Supreme Military Council (SMC), and we will be consulting with Congress on these matters in the coming weeks.

This effort is aimed at strengthening the effectiveness of the SMC, and helping to coordinate the provision of assistance by the US and other partners and allies. Put simply, the Assad regime should know that its actions have led us to increase the scope and scale of assistance that we provide to the opposition, including direct support to the SMC. These efforts will increase going forward.

It's difficult to imagine these changes dramatically altering the current course of the war, which has seen Assad's forces gaining with assistance from Iran and Hezbollah.

So the obvious question is whether this news will lead to any more changes. Given Obama's clear skepticism about the merits of greater US involvement and his administration's concerns about the risks, it's hard to foresee him changing course for the sake of his own, self-imposed red line. As Foreign Policy's Blake Hounshell put it recently, "Even if the White House does go ahead and decide that Obama's murky, pinkish-reddish-orange line has in fact been crossed, it doesn't seem prepared to do much about it. The plan is to press for a United Nations investigation of the alleged chemical-weapons use, not to fire up the B-52s."

Two things are almost sure to happen: 1st, the US will press for the United Nations Security Council to commit to some action, even if only to issue a resolution censuring Assad, and, 2nd, Russia and China will either water it down or veto it outright.

It is possible that the Obama administration might decide, despite the risks of greater involvement in Syria, that the international norm against chemical weapons is valuable enough to merit defending. That could mean a limited symbolic response -- say, bombing some Syrian facilities -- or perhaps even more decisive, committed military support for the rebels, although that seems unlikely under the current circumstances.

What seems especially unlikely is that the Obama administration will bow to critics who charge that Obama must intervene in Syria or he risks losing "international credibility" by not responding with sufficient force to Syria's crossing of his red line.

Expect to hear warnings on cable TV that "the mullahs are watching." That charge is not wholly without merit, but it's worth noting, as Fareed Zakaria recently did, that the Reagan administration pulled US troops out of Lebanon rather than risk involvement in that country's civil war. At the time, critics charged that he was tarnishing American credibility and that "the Soviets are watching." As it turned out, Reagan's decision was largely vindicated and American credibility survived.

In any case, world leaders are sophisticated enough to see that Obama has never shown much willingness to intervene and to grasp the difference between an earnest, specific threat and a vague red line.

That doesn't mean that the Obama administration won't respond or that it shouldn't. But so far, it does not appear persuaded that the chemical weapons red line necessarily triggers the kind of action that intervention advocates have been calling for.

[byline: Max Fisher]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Sarin is a clear, tasteless, colorless, odorless liquid in pure form. It may be released as a vapor and spread rapidly into the environment.

Sarin was originally developed as a pesticide in Germany, functioning much like an organophosphate insecticide, with similar clinical signs after exposure. Many organophosphate pesticides are regarded as nerve agents because of their profound effects on the nervous system.

When released as a gas sarin is heavier than air and will settle into low lying areas, constituting a greater exposure hazard. As gas or vapor it may cling to the clothes of people and continue to off-gas for some time. Vapor is also harmful to exposed skin and to mucus membranes, especially those of the eyes.

Exposure may not be noticed as sarin is odorless, tasteless, and water soluble. Consequently exposure may occur by inhalation, ingestion of contaminated food or water, or by touching contaminated surfaces. Symptoms may begin within seconds to hours as the amount of exposure will influence the time to clinical signs.

Clinical signs of sarin exposure may be similar to those of other intoxications. Signs of organophosphate and of sarin poisoning include runny nose, lacrimation, eye pain, blurred vision, and pinpoint pupils. Other signs include excessive sweating, drooling, coughing, and tightness of the test, rapid breathing, either a slow or fast heart rate, low or high blood pressure, weakness, headache, confusion, vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, increased urination, muscle twitching, and even convulsions. There may be loss of consciousness with high dose exposure, convulsions, paralysis, and respiratory arrest leading to death.

Sarin blocks the acetylcholine esterase, the enzyme needed to stop the nerve activation. Consequently the continuous activation of the nerves presents with these clinical signs.

Atropine and pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM Cl) are antidotes for nerve agent toxicity; however, to be effective, 2-PAM Cl must be administered within minutes to a few hours (depending on the agent) following exposure. There is also generally no benefit from giving more than 3 injections of 2-PAM Cl. Atropine should be administered every 5 to 10 minutes until secretions begin to dry up.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from http://www.cdc.gov/NIOSH/ershdb/EmergencyResponseCard_29750001.html.

Syria may be found on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/3aLZ - Mod.TG]
See Also
Chemical weapons - Syria (04): sarin: 20130606.1757059
Chemical weapons - Syria (03): sarin 20130605.1755498
Chemical weapons - Syria (02): investigation 20130321.1597374
Chemical weapons - Syria: claims of civilian losses 20130320.1595751
1999
---
Sarin gas, sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) (02) 19990327.0480
Sarin gas sequelae - Japan (Tokyo) 19990203.0157
.................................................sb/jw/mhj/tg/je/sh
</body>
