<header id=017157>
Published Date: 2012-08-24 20:48:47 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Digital dermatitis - New Zealand: bovine
Archive Number: 20120825.1262055
</header>
<body id=017157>
DIGITAL DERMATITIS - NEW ZEALAND: BOVINE
*****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 23 Aug 2012
Source: Stuff.co.nz [edited]
http://www.stuff.co.nz/taranaki-daily-news/lifestyle/farming/7531476/Disease-threat-to-cows


A rare bacterial infection discovered in a Taranaki cow could pose a threat to New Zealand's dairy industry.

Inglewood veterinarian, Neil Chesterton, an authority on lameness in pasture-fed cattle, was stunned to find the condition, digital dermatitis, in a herd here. It came to light only when the farmer with the problem cow rang Chesterton, after reading an article he wrote about the disease and seeing his photographs.

Chesterton said farmers who found the infection should call their vet. "We need to know about it. If it's not controlled, it could become an epidemic -- like in every other country. It will affect animal welfare and lead to loss of production and reproduction losses."

UK experts have told him New Zealand should be worried about digital dermatitis because in other countries the level of infection had always escalated, if ignored.

"No-one is sure why it starts to spread," Chesterton said. "We mustn't relax. It looks as though New Zealand is at the 1st stage."

Occasional cases have also been reported on about 10 South Island farms. "Once it's established, no herd in the world has got rid of it.

"I want to get the message about this bug to all farmers and every vet. I don't want it to develop to the next stage."

A working party consisting of vets and representatives from DairyNZ and other industry organisations, is now being set up to raise awareness of the infection and to develop prevention and treatment programmes.

At the Taranaki farm, Chesterton cut out the infection in the cow's foot, applied a topical antibiotic solution, bandaged it for 2 days and advised putting the entire herd through a footbath. "The bug hates antibiotics and the skin heals well. After 5 days it was virtually healed.

"I don't know where it came from. It's not a large herd, the herd is totally outside and it's a clean, low-altitude farm run by a careful farmer."

Earlier this year Chesterton discovered the infection in Chile where he was investigating lameness on a corporate dairy farm with 20 000 cows.

The find was unexpected because the infection, 1st discovered in Italy in 1974, is usually confined to housed cattle. Dairy farms in Chile are similar to New Zealand and cows live outside, so he expected lameness there to be caused by factors like poor stockmanship and narrow races with unsuitable surfaces.

"But the 1st foot I examined, I knew they had something different."

The cow had a white line injury that occurs when the seam joining the hoof wall and sole is weakened, allowing mud and stones to enter and cause an infection.

When he opened up the white line, a sickening smell was released from a lesion inside.

The infection created a stinging sensation and was painful for cows when standing. Left untreated, it became chronic and the pain disappeared. But the cow continued to drop the bacteria, spreading it around the herd.

A total of 11 per cent of the Chilean herd had digital dermatitis on the skin of the heel. 60 per cent of the animals with white line injury had developed deep infections.

Despite hoof trimming and antibiotic treatment for 12 months, the infection did not heal and affected the bone. Cows had to be culled or the claw amputated to get rid of the infection.

Conducting a road show on lameness in Victoria and South Australia a month ago, he discovered some Australian dairy herds had up to 30 per cent of their cows infected with skin digital dermatitis.

Vets there had seen odd cases over the past 10 years before the infection started spreading about 3 years ago.

The 3rd phase of the infection was invasion of the white line and sole injuries, as in Chile. "It becomes more virulent, with wounds that do not heal.

"My mission is to stop it becoming like it is in Australia. We don't want it to reach even the 2nd phase here."

He's advising all farmers to clean their cows' feet at milking time and to look for the infection in the back feet. "It's hardly ever in the front feet."

He's also suggesting farmers with herd homes, feed pads, or dirty conditions at cowshed entries and exits have footbaths at the cowshed exit race.

Whether the footbath contained a solution or not, cows should always walk through it so they get used to it.

"It needs to be big enough to hold one litre of sterilising solution per cow -- formalin, copper sulphate or a branded footbath solution. The cowshed exit needs to be wide and the footbath should be at floor level, so cow flow is not obstructed."

Any farmer building a new cowshed should allow for a footbath. Vets could offer advice about the design.

Chesterton said the trepanome bacteria that caused the infection needed a dirty environment. "It grows on the skin of dirty feet, not on clean feet.

"New Zealand's increasing use of indoor housing and feed pads could create an environment for the bacteria to thrive.

"Now that we're housing cows, we could be setting ourselves up for this disease. There is a place for shelter for cows in New Zealand. Shelters reduce pasture damage and leaching, and protect cows from the elements. They're fantastic for the cow -- but they're also a place where bugs can grow. Farmers with such facilities should establish a programme to prevent the infection," he said.

[Byline: Sue O'Dowd]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Digital dermatitis is a highly contagious, erosive, and proliferative infection of the epidermis proximal to the skin-horn junction in the flexor region of the interdigital space. Morbidity within a herd can be greater then 90 percent. It can affect any breed or age group, although young animals with a poor immune response are most susceptible. It spreads rapidly from newly acquired animals, or it may be introduced by any mechanical vector; e.g., boots or hoof trimming instruments.

The condition was 1st seen in European countries, but during the last decade it has spread across the dairy-producing areas of the USA. The incidence in beef cattle appears to be minimal. The incidence is highest in loose-housed herds that are not kept clean. The prevalence is highest in the fall and winter and is lowest if the animals are pastured.

2 main types of lesions are seen. One is erosive/reactive; the other is proliferative or wart-like. Both forms cause varying degrees of discomfort and may give rise to severe lameness. Sometimes, one particular form predominates in one area, but both forms can be seen in the same animal. The 2 forms likely represent different stages of the disease process. Some of the variation may be due to concurrent interdigital dermatitis

Herd outbreaks are best treated with a footbath containing oxytetracycline or lincomycin-spectinomycin. For optimal effect, the heels of the cows should be washed thoroughly before entering the footbath. Repeat treatments may be needed after 4-6 weeks, depending on the extent of the environmental challenge. Results of footbaths containing copper sulfate, zinc sulfate, or formalin have been poor to inconclusive. However, these footbaths may have a beneficial effect in reducing the prevalence of interdigital dermatitis, thus decreasing the susceptibility for digital dermatitis.

In advanced cases, individual treatment is necessary. The foot, especially the interdigital area, should be thoroughly cleansed to remove the prolific population of spirochetes. A single dressing of 36 percent muriatic acid can be applied carefully to the infected tissue and protected by a waterproof bandage. Repeated dressing with the caustic preparation is not advisable.

Topical dressing of the lesion and surrounding surfaces with soluble oxytetracycline or lincomycin-spectinomycin (66 g and 132 g/L of water, respectively) produces the best results. More than one treatment will probably be necessary. Topical dressings should be protected by waterproof bandages or a reinforced nylon device that can be affixed with Velcro closures. Oxytetracyline treatment has not resulted in detectable residual levels of the antibiotic in blood or milk. Extremely high parenteral antibiotic doses have been reported to help resolve severe lesions.

Topical sprays can be applied when the cows are recumbent. The nozzle of the wand of a portable unit can be applied directly to the lesion. This is a useful follow-up technique to either foot bathing or direct application of medication. With extreme care, formalin may also be used to reinforce antibiotic therapy.

Digital dermatitis is exacerbated by filthy, wet conditions. Slurry removal and improved standards of hygiene are essential for control. In herds in which this condition is not a problem, animals should be isolated for one month before being added to the herd. Effective vaccines are not available.

Portions of this comment were extracted from: http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/90530.htm.

New Zealand may be found on the interactive HealthMap at: http://healthmap.org/r/1hiF. - Mod.TG]

.................................................sb/tg/ejp/ml
</body>
