<header id=009286>
Published Date: 2018-12-02 17:45:56 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Herpesvirus, elephant - USA: (OR) fatality
Archive Number: 20181202.6176860
</header>
<body id=009286>
HERPESVIRUS, ELEPHANT - USA: (OREGON) FATALITY
**********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 30 Nov 2018
Source: Oregon Public Broadcasting [edited]
https://www.opb.org/news/article/virus-elephant-oregon-zoo-lily-dead-herpes/


The death of the Oregon Zoo's youngest elephant was sudden but not unusual: The virus that killed her is the leading cause death for young Asian elephants like Lily worldwide, affecting captive animals and animals in the wild. Lily had elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus (EEHV). Like herpesvirus in humans, it most often presents as small bumps on the skin. But sometimes, the virus causes severe internal bleeding.

The virus was 1st identified in 1995, when an elephant at the Smithsonian National Zoo died. Today, that zoo runs the National Elephant Herpesvirus Laboratory. Their lab manager Erin Latimer says that for a long time, they were the only people studying the elephant virus.

It is thought almost all captive and wild elephants worldwide carry the virus, but it is mostly only older calves who get sick. Scientists think when the elephants are very young they are protected by the antibodies in their mother's milk. Calves are particularly susceptible once they are weaned: Their immune system is not fully developed, but they are no longer protected by their mother. By the time they are about 8 years old, the risk starts to decrease.

There is no way to tell if an elephant is going to get sick from EEHV. The virus hides in nerve cells where it cannot be detected. Veterinarians can only find the virus once it is circling through the animal's blood, at which point it may be too late to treat. No one knows why the virus stays dormant in some elephants but kills others.

At least 40 young elephants in the US have succumbed to the virus since it was 1st identified, Latimer said. It is unknown how many have died in the wild because they are too hard to track.

Oregon Zoo veterinarian Kelly Flaminio says that about one in 5 young Asian elephants dies from the disease in captivity. It is reasonable to suspect that the same number die in the wild.

Because the disease is so common, zookeepers perform weekly blood tests and send samples to the National Elephant Herpesvirus Laboratory at the Smithsonian. It is partly for research (the Smithsonian is trying to develop better treatments and a vaccine) and partly for diagnostics.

That is how they found out Lily was sick: Even though she was not showing signs, the Smithsonian lab told zookeepers on Wednesday [28 Nov 2018] the virus was active at low levels in her blood.

By Thursday [29 Nov 2018] morning, Lily was acting lethargic, and staff began to treat her with human antivirals -- the only known treatment. Later that night, she was dead. She is the only elephant at the Oregon Zoo to have succumbed to the virus.

For zoo staff, it is particularly hard. Elephants are intelligent animals with strong personalities, and Lily was, by all accounts, vivacious. Friday [30 Nov 2018] would have been her 6th birthday.

"I was here when she was born," said Flaminio, who was there when Lily's brother Samudra was born, too. "Her brother was subdued, but from the moment [Lily] was born, she knew exactly what she wanted: She wanted get up and she wanted to run around and she wanted to roar and she wanted to trumpet."

And that was what she did, every day, until she got sick.

There is not a lot veterinarians can do to help elephants once signs appear. According to Latimer, if the virus is caught early, it has a roughly 40% mortality rate with treatment. But once there are signs, the mortality rate goes up to 70% or higher.

The sick elephants are treated with human anti-herpes drugs because there has not been funding to develop drugs to manage elephant herpes. Veterinarians are not even positive the treatments work, but they do know the only elephants surviving EEHV receive human antivirals. No one wants to take the risk of not administering the drugs.

The Oregon Zoo has no plans to close the elephant exhibit, although that could change: They want the elephants to have access to all of their habitat.

"We want them to know Lily is gone and have space to grieve together as a family. Elephants do that," Flaminio said. It is not just a hard time for the humans at the zoo.

Because the virus is so hard to treat and detect, the best way to stop it is to prevent it. But it is so prevalent there is no easy way to prevent transmission. The National Elephant Herpesvirus Laboratory is working to develop a vaccine, to stop elephants from getting the virus in the 1st place.

It is not easy, Latimer said. They have not found a way to get the virus to reproduce in the lab -- which you need to do before you can make a vaccine the traditional way -- so they are looking into other methods. They have partnered with universities and medical schools. Research is still early, but they are optimistic.

There is some good news: When Latimer 1st began her work at the Smithsonian, her lab was the only one in the world testing for EEHV. That's no longer the case.

More labs have sprung up. Some zoos can even test for the virus on their own. And Latimer has traveled to Thailand and Cambodia and Borneo to help others start their own laboratories to test for the virus and contribute to research. They hope, one day, imperiled wild elephants won't die from the disease that took Lily.

There are at least 15 of these labs today.

[Byline: Erin Ross]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: 30 Nov 2018
Source: The Epoch Times [edited]
https://www.theepochtimes.com/oregon-zoo-says-youngest-elephant-lily-dies-suddenly-from-virus_2728040.html


The Oregon Zoo, located in Portland, said its youngest elephant, Lily, suddenly died from a virus on 29 Nov 2018. "With immense sadness, we said goodbye to Lily late last night. She would have been 6 years old today," said zoo officials in a Facebook post on 30 Nov 2018. "We lost Lily less than a day after she showed signs of a viral infection called EEHV. Nearly all Asian elephants in the wild and in zoos carry EEHV, but when it enters an active phase in calves, it is usually fatal."

EEHV, or endotheliotropic herpesvirus, is a rapidly progressing and often fatal disease that particularly affects elephant calves, KPTV noted. Zoo staff could not save her in time, the zoo said, adding that Lily fought until the end of her life.

"When she passed, she was with her mother Rose-Tu and surrounded by people who had cared for her since her birth. Her aunties Chendra and Shine also spent time beside her. Lily brought joy to everyone she encountered. This is a heartbreaking loss for the herd and our entire community," according to the statement from the zoo. The Oregon Zoo then said it closed the zoo on 30 Nov 2018 "to give staff a chance to grieve."

"I can't imagine a more devastating loss for this zoo family and our community," said Dr. Don Moore, zoo director, according to KPTV. "Lily was the darling of the zoo. She was loved by everyone from her elephant family to the people who cared for her every day to her thousands of fans. Our staff did everything they could and fought to save her until the very end. Everyone is in mourning here. It is just heartbreaking." After zoo staff noticed something was amiss with the elephant, they began treatment immediately with fluids and medication as well as a transfusion, the report said.

The animal was born 30 Nov 2012, to its mother, named Rose-Tu, and father Tusko. The elephant became a favorite among zoo staff and visitors, reported OregonLive. Lily weighed 1200 pounds [544 kg] when she was one year old.

EEHV is the leading cause of death among elephants under the age of 8 years, zoo officials told OregonLive. "It's very difficult to study the virus in wild elephants," Moore said. "But zoos can monitor their elephant herds closely and obtain samples of blood and other fluids. Right now, that's our best hope of developing a vaccine."

According to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), Asian elephants like Lily are classified as an endangered species. "More than 100 000 Asian elephants may have existed at the beginning of the 20th century, roaming from the Persian Gulf to India and China. But their numbers have plummeted by at least 50% in the past 3 generations. A large portion of the world's human population now lives in or near Asian elephant habitat, which has dwindled to just 15% of its historic range. Habitat loss and fragmentation and pressures from poaching and the live elephant trade pose an ever-growing threat to these nomads," the WWF says.

[Byline: Jack Phillips]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[What an extremely sad story as we all share the loss of the Asian elephant Lily.

Elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus 1A is a member of the _Proboscivirus_ genus and is a major cause of fatal hemorrhagic disease in endangered juvenile Asian elephants worldwide. This virus causes fatal hemorrhagic disease perhaps more commonly identified at North American zoos. The virus causes only benign external herpetic lesions in African elephants, but in Asian elephants the infection results in endothelial disease, which in many cases can be fatal. Asian elephant deaths are the consequence of cross-species infection with a herpesvirus that is naturally latent in, but normally not lethal to, African elephants [assistance on this portion of the comment from Mod.PMB].

Researchers at the Smithsonian's National Zoo were the 1st to identify elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus (EEHV) in 1995 after the death of their 16-month-old Asian elephant, Kumari, who was Shanthi's 1st calf. Since then, these researchers have made significant discoveries on the biology of EEHV.

Elephants in human care and in the wild have been affected by EEHV, which has been responsible for about half of the deaths of young elephants in zoos. In response, cooperative multi-institutional research efforts have been underway for more than a decade to study EEHV, identify the various strains, learn about their transmission, develop and improve treatments, and find a vaccine. In the wild, elephants face extreme pressure from human-elephant conflict, habitat loss, and poaching. In institutions accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA), elephants are important conservation ambassadors for their species and ecosystems. Seeing, hearing, and even smelling these magnificent animals up close in zoos is critical to helping visitors make an emotional connection to the natural world of elephants and take action to help protect their future. To save elephants, scientists need easy access to the animals to study them. Zoos provide an unparalleled opportunity for this.

Many animals and humans carry herpesviruses throughout their lives and never become ill. What researchers do not know is what triggers the virus to become active and where exactly in the body the virus hides in its latent (hidden) phase. We do not know why some animals become ill and others do not. It is important to understand that it is not about who has the virus, but who gets ill and when. When they get the disease does seem to be important; calves who are nursing rarely get EEHV, so maternal antibodies seem to be important in protecting the calf from acute EEHV disease.

There is not enough research to confirm how EEHV itself is transmitted, but most viruses are normally spread from one individual to another. Viral shedding occurs when it comes out of latency (hiding); however, there is no simple way to detect if the virus is active without a blood test. What we do know is that every elephant -- in the wild and in human care -- probably carries one or more forms of herpesvirus within them.

Like all mammals and humans, elephants carry a variety of different herpesviruses throughout their lives, and the majority of them may never cause illness, likely remaining latent (hidden). Some cause mild disease and some cause severe disease or death. Claims that certain zoos are contaminated once an animal becomes ill from EEHV are unfounded and based on a lack of understanding of how the viruses live within their hosts. Having a herpesvirus is the norm, not the exception. Like many viruses, herpesviruses cannot live very long outside the body, so a herpes outbreak does not "contaminate" a facility.

To date there has been no evidence found of shedding of virus into semen or transmission of EEHV through natural breeding or artificial insemination. The Zoo currently follows the AZA Elephant TAG/SSP (Taxon Advisory Group and Species Survival Plan), which recommends that institutions continue to exchange elephants and elephant semen for breeding and artificial insemination as specified in the breeding recommendations.

Cessation of breeding elephants in human care is not the solution to eliminate EEHV or to ensure the survival of elephants. Infectious diseases, including EEHV, are only one of many threats to the survival of elephants. Efforts to save the species cannot be undermined because of fears from a single, potentially manageable problem. Instead, continued studies and research are the tools to better manage the disease, prevent it, and control its spread to ensure the continued survival and conservation of elephants. When an outbreak of equine herpes occurred in 2005 in horses, the industry did not shut down. Instead it funded research that resulted in treatment, prevention, and control of that disease. When black-footed ferrets were nearly driven to extinction in the 1980s in part from canine distemper, we did not stop breeding them. US Fish and Wildlife Service, AZA institutions, private landowners, conservation organizations, and other groups collaborated on a rescue and recovery program. An effective vaccine was developed, and the species bounced back from the brink of extinction.

Although there are no guarantees as to the fate of a future elephant calf, Zoo experts have operated for many years under the conservative assumption that all the elephants in the Zoo's care could have one or more latent (hidden) herpesviruses. The risk is no higher or lower for an elephant born here, in the wild or at another zoo or sanctuary. Zoo researchers will continue to gather the evolving research and use the latest information to guide decisions in caring for the herd. If animal keepers see any signs of illness caused by elephant herpesviruses in one of the elephants, Zoo experts would institute immediate treatment, relying on the strong body of knowledge acquired since they 1st discovered this disease in 1995.

The main test done at the EEHV lab is called PCR [polymerase chain reaction]; it looks for DNA from EEHV in blood from sick elephants or tissues from dead elephants and new births. Researchers use this to diagnose an active case of EEHV or to look for shedding of the virus when it comes out of latency (hiding). Zoo scientists consult with researchers around the world and help set up labs in other countries so that more research can be done, on both elephants in human care and in the wild. Some current research projects include determining the prevalence of the virus in range countries, subtyping the virus from cases to determine transmission and epidemiology of the viruses, determining the prevalence of the virus in different tissues and fluids, and improving on the diagnostic assays.

The National Elephant Herpesvirus Laboratory at the Smithsonian's National Zoo is dedicated to investigating this set of diseases, to understanding how to protect elephants in zoos, to solving the mystery of how EEHV is spread, and to developing an effective vaccine for the virus.

The collaborative work zoos are doing to better understand EEHV may have important implications for wild elephants in the future. Wildlife biologists may one day need to draw upon the growing body of work and knowledge generated by zoos and the international elephant community to contribute to the long-term survival of the species in both zoo and wild populations.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from https://nationalzoo.si.edu/animals/national-elephant-herpesvirus-laboratory. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
Oregon, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6176860,239]
See Also
Herpesvirus, elephant - Malaysia: fatal, susp. 20180717.5911223
2016
----
Herpesvirus, elephant - USA: (FL) 20160203.3988559
2013
----
Herpesvirus, zoo elephants - UK: (CZ) Chester 20130802.1856713
2009
----
Herpesvirus, Asian zoo elephants - USA (02): (MO) 20090228.0839
Herpesvirus, zoo elephant - USA: (MO) 20090220.0712
2008
----
Herpesvirus, zoo elephant - USA (03) 20081116.3622
1999
----
Herpesvirus, new, elephants - USA (02) 19990225.0254
Herpes virus, new, elephants - USA 19990222.0233
.................................................tg/rd/ml
</body>
