<header id=016988>
Published Date: 2015-04-20 09:36:29 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: revelations
Archive Number: 20150420.3309942
</header>
<body id=016988>
ANTHRAX, HUMAN, 2001 - USA: REVELATIONS
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 17 Apr 2015
Source: Center for Research on Globalization [edited]
http://www.globalresearch.ca/head-of-the-fbis-anthrax-investigation-says-the-whole-thing-was-a-sham/5443516


Head of the FBI's anthrax investigation says the whole thing was a sham
------------------------------------------------------------------
Agent In charge of Amerithrax Investigation Blows the Whistle. The FBI head agent in charge of the anthrax investigation -- Richard Lambert -- has just filed a federal whistleblower lawsuit calling the entire FBI investigation bulls**t:

In the fall of 2001, following the 9/11 attacks, a series of anthrax mailings occurred which killed 5 Americans and sickened 17 others. Four anthrax-laden envelopes were recovered which were addressed to 2 news media outlets in New York City (the New York Post and Tom Brokaw at NBC) and 2 senators in Washington, DC (Patrick Leahy and Tom Daschle). The anthrax letters addressed to New York were mailed on 18 Sep 2001, just 7 days after the 9/11 attacks. The letters addressed to the senators were mailed 21 days later on 9 Oct 2001. A 5th mailing of anthrax is believed to have been directed to American Media, Inc. (AMI) in Boca Raton, Florida based upon the death of one AMI employee from anthrax poisoning and heavy spore contamination in the building.

Executive management at FBI Headquarters assigned responsibility for the anthrax investigation (code named "AMERITHRAX") to the Washington Field Office (WFO), dubbing it the single most important case in the FBI at that time. In October 2002, in the wake of surging media criticism, White House impatience with a seeming lack of investigative progress by WFO, and a concerned Congress that was considering revoking the FBI's charter to investigate terrorism cases, Defendant FBI director Mueller reassigned Plaintiff from the FBI's San Diego Field Office to the Inspection Division at FBI Headquarters and placed Plaintiff in charge of the AMERITHRAX case as an "inspector". While leading the investigation for the next 4 years, Plaintiff's efforts to advance the case met with intransigence from WFO's executive management, apathy and error from the FBI Laboratory, politically motivated communication embargos from FBI Headquarters, and yet another preceding and equally erroneous legal opinion from Defendant Kelley -- all of which greatly obstructed and impeded the investigation.

On 6 Jul 2006, Plaintiff provided a whistleblower report of mismanagement to the FBI's deputy director pursuant to Title 5, United States Code, Section 2303. Reports of mismanagement conveyed in writing and orally included: (a) WFO's persistent understaffing of the AMERITHRAX investigation; (b) the threat of WFO's agent in charge to retaliate if Plaintiff disclosed the understaffing to FBI Headquarters; (c) WFO's insistence on staffing the AMERITHRAX investigation principally with new agents recently graduated from the FBI Academy resulting in an average investigative tenure of 18 months with 12 of 20 agents assigned to the case having no prior investigative experience at all; (d) WFO's eviction of the AMERITHRAX Task Force from the WFO building in downtown Washington and its relegation to Tysons Corner, Virginia to free up space for Attorney General Ashcroft's new pornography squads; (e) FBI director's Mueller's mandate to Plaintiff to "compartmentalize" the AMERITHRAX investigation by stove piping the flow of case information and walling off task force members from those aspects of the case not specifically assigned to them -- a move intended to stem the tide of anonymous media leaks by government officials regarding details of the investigation. [Lambert complained about compartmentalizing and stovepiping of the investigation in a 2006 declaration. See this, this and this. [Go to the actual report to click on these links. - Mod.MHJ]

This sequestration edict decimated morale and proved unnecessary in light of subsequent civil litigation which established that the media leaks were attributable to the United States attorney for the District of the District of Columbia and to a supervisory special agent in the FBI's National Press Office, not to investigators on the AMERITHRAX Task Force; (f) WFO's diversion and transfer of 2 PhD microbiologist special agents from their key roles in the investigation to fill billets for an 18 month Arabic language training program in Israel; (g) the FBI Laboratory's deliberate concealment from the Task Force of its discovery of human DNA on the anthrax-laden envelope addressed to Senator Leahy and the lab's initial refusal to perform comparison testing; (h) the FBI Laboratory's refusal to provide timely and adequate scientific analyses and forensic examinations in support of the investigation; (i) Defendant Kelley's erroneous and subsequently quashed legal opinion that regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) precluded the Task Force's collection of evidence in overseas venues; (j) the FBI's fingering of Bruce Ivins as the anthrax mailer; and, (k) the FBI's subsequent efforts to railroad the prosecution of Ivins in the face of daunting exculpatory evidence.

Following the announcement of its circumstantial case against Ivins, Defendants DOJ and FBI crafted an elaborate perception management campaign to bolster their assertion of Ivins' guilt. These efforts included press conferences and highly selective evidentiary presentations which were replete with material omissions. Plaintiff further objected to the FBI's ordering of Plaintiff not to speak with the staff of the CBS television news magazine 60 Minutes or investigative journalist David Willman, after both requested authorization to interview Plaintiff.

In April 2008, some of Plaintiff's foregoing whistleblower reports were profiled on the CBS television show 60 Minutes. This 60 Minutes segment was critical of FBI executive management's handling of the AMERITHRAX investigation, resulting in the agency's embarrassment and the introduction of legislative bills calling for the establishment of congressional inquiries and special commissions to examine these issues -- a level of scrutiny the FBI's Ivins attribution could not withstand.

After leaving the AMERITHRAX investigation in 2006, Plaintiff continued to publicly opine that the quantum of circumstantial evidence against Bruce Ivins was not adequate to satisfy the proof-beyond-a-reasonable doubt threshold required to secure a criminal conviction in federal court. Plaintiff continued to advocate that while Bruce Ivins may have been the anthrax mailer, there is a wealth of exculpatory evidence to the contrary which the FBI continues to conceal from Congress and the American people.

Exonerating evidence for Ivins
------------------------------
Agent Lambert won't publicly disclose the exculpatory evidence against Ivins. As the New York Times reports: "[Lambert] declined to be specific, saying that most of the information was protected by the Privacy Act and was unlikely to become public unless Congress carried out its own inquiry." But there is already plenty of exculpatory evidence in the public record.

For example:
(1) Handwriting analysis failed to link the anthrax letters to known writing samples from Ivins
(2) No textile fibers were found in Ivins' office, residence or vehicles matching fibers found on the scotch tape used to seal the envelopes
(3) No pens were found matching the ink used to address the envelopes
(4) Samples of his hair failed to match hair follicles found inside the Princeton, New Jersey, mailbox used to mail the letters
(5) No souvenirs of the crime, such as newspaper clippings, were found in his possession as commonly seen in serial murder cases
(7) The FBI could not place Ivins at the crime scene with evidence, such as gas station or other receipts, at the time the letters were mailed in September and October 2001
(8) Lab records show the number of late nights Ivins put in at the lab 1st spiked in August 2001, weeks before the 9/11 attacks

As noted above, the FBI didn't want to test the DNA sample found on the anthrax letter to Senator Leahy. In addition, McClatchy points out: "After locking in on Ivins in 2007, the bureau stopped searching for a match to a unique genetic bacterial strain scientists had found in the anthrax that was mailed to the Post and to NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, although a senior bureau official had characterized it as the hottest clue to date." [This was a unique genotypic strain of _Bacillus subtilis_ found in the anthrax spore-filled letters sent to the journalists. - Mod.MHJ]

Anthrax vaccine expert Meryl Nass. MD, notes: "The FBI's alleged motive is bogus. In 2001, Bioport's anthrax vaccine could not be (legally) relicensed due to potency failures, and its impending demise provided room for Ivins' newer anthrax vaccines to fill the gap. Ivins had nothing to do with developing Bioport's vaccine, although in addition to his duties working on newer vaccines, he was charged with assisting Bioport to get through licensure."

The FBI report claims the anthrax letters envelopes were sold in Frederick, Maryland. Later it admits that millions of indistinguishable envelopes were made, with sales in Maryland and Virginia.

FBI emphasizes Ivins' access to a photocopy machine, but fails to mention it was not the machine from which the notes that accompanied the spores were printed.

FBI fudged the science
----------------------
16 government labs had access to the same strain of anthrax as used in the anthrax letters. The FBI admitted that up to 400 people had access to flask of anthrax in Dr Ivins' lab. In other words, even if the killer anthrax came from there, 399 other people might have done it.

However, the FBI's claim that the killer anthrax came from Ivins' flask has fallen apart. Specifically, both the National Academy of Science and the Government Accountability Office -- both extremely prestigious, nonpartisan agencies -- found that FBI's methodology and procedures for purportedly linking the anthrax flask maintained by Dr Ivins with the anthrax letters was sloppy, inconclusive and full of holes. They found that the alleged link wasn't very strong ... and that there was no firm link. Indeed, the National Academy of Sciences found that the anthrax mailed to Congressmen and the media could have come from a different source altogether than the flask maintained by Ivins.

After all, the entire Ft Detrick facility -- where Ivins worked -- only dealt with liquid anthrax. But the killer anthrax was a hard-to-make dry powder form of anthrax. Ft Detrick doesn't produce dry anthrax; but other government labs -- in Utah (Dugway) and Ohio (Batelle) -- do.

The anthrax in the letters was also incredibly finely ground; and the FBI's explanation doesn't pass the smell test.

Moreover, the killer anthrax in the letters had a very high-tech anti-static coating so that the spores "floated off the glass slide and was lost" when scientists tried to examine them. Specifically, the killer anthrax was coated with polyglass and each anthrax spore given an electrostatic charge, so that they would repel other spores and "float." In other words, this was very advanced bioweapons technology.

Top anthrax experts like Richard Spertzel say that Ivins didn't do it. Spertzel also says that only 4 or 5 people in the entire country knew how to make anthrax of the "quality" used in the letters, that Spertzel was one of them, and it would have taken him a year with a full lab and a staff of helpers to do it. As such, the FBI's claim that Ivins did it alone working a few nights is ludicrous.

Moreover, the killer anthrax contained silicon ... but the anthrax in Ivins' flask did not. The FBI claimed the silicon present in the anthrax letters was absorbed from its surroundings ... but Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories completely debunked that theory. In other words, silicon was intentionally added to the killer anthrax to make it more potent. And Ivins and Ft Detrick didn't have that capability; but other government labs did. [ie, it was microencapsulated. - Mod.MHJ]

Similarly, Sandia National Lab found the presence of iron and tin in the killer anthrax ... but NOT in Ivins' flask of anthrax.

Sandia also found that there was a strain of bacteria in one of the anthrax letters not present in Ivins' flask. [The _Bacillus subtilis_ noted above. - Mod.MHJ]

The anthrax frame up
--------------------
Ivins wasn't the 1st person framed for the anthrax attacks ...

Although the FBI now admits that the 2001 anthrax attacks were carried out by one or more US government scientists, a senior FBI official says that the FBI was actually told to blame the anthrax attacks on Al Qaeda by White House officials (remember what the anthrax letters looked like). Government officials also confirm that the White House tried to link the anthrax to Iraq as a justification for regime change in that country. And see this. People don't remember now, but the "war on terror" and Iraq war were largely based on the claim that Saddam and Muslim extremists were behind the anthrax attacks (and see this and this).

And the anthrax letters pushed a terrified Congress into approving the Patriot Act without even reading it. Coincidentally, the only Congressmen who received anthrax letters were the ones who were likely to oppose the Patriot Act. [The 'Al Mateczun' Hypothesis. - Mod.MHJ]

And -- between the Al Qaeda/Iraq angle and Ivins -- the FBI was convinced that another US government scientist, Steven Hatfill, did it. The government had to pay Hatfill USD 4.6 million to settle his lawsuit for being falsely accused.

Ivins' convenient death
-----------------------
It is convenient for the FBI that Ivins died. The Wall Street Journal points out: "No autopsy was performed [on Ivins], and there was no suicide note." Indeed, one of Ivins' colleagues at Ft Deitrich thinks he was murdered.

Whether murder or suicide, Ivins' death was very convenient for the FBI, as dead men can't easily defend themselves.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This report raises a number of interesting points. Many have pointed out the importance of the _B. subtilis_ contaminant, which is genetically unique and therefore has the capacity to be an institutional forensic fingerprint. The FBI extensively tested USAMRIID for any _B. subtilis_ and found none. Perry Mikesell & Bruce Ivins in their discovery of the anthrax plasmids and virulence used _B. subtilis_ in some of those experiments. After publication in 1983 no _B. subtilis_ was used at RIID. All this was done prior to 1985. The strain of _B. subtilis_ used by Mikesell & Ivins in the early 1980s was obtained from ATCC and discarded at the end of their experiments. If it had persisted, genotyping would have tied it to that ATCC strain.

For proof that the letter contents did not originate from the RMR 1029 flask in Ivins' lab, go to table 3, page 27, and figure 8, page 64 of the GAO report [20141222.3048707]. Replicate tests of undiluted samples from RMR 1029 showed 17/30 (57 per cent +) positive for mutant A1, 29/30 (97 per cent +) for mutant A3, 23/30 (77 per cent +) for mutant D1, 24/30 (80 per cent +) for mutant D2, and 30/30 (100 per cent +) for mutant E. Thus the chance of a sample being positive for all 5 mutants is only 34 per cent. When these results are matched with those of letter spores the latter were 100 per cent + for mutants A1, A3, D1, and D2 but only 23/30 (77 per cent +) of the letter replicates were positive for E. How come all the flask replicates had E but only 23/30 of the letter spore replicates? Clearly they had separate origins and RMR 1029 was not the source for the letter spores.

There are other arguments that can be made to show that Ivins had nothing to do with these anthrax spore letters. But note this, the samples recovered from the letters indicated that they were probably the product of a research project involving microencapsulation and the learning process involved. USAMRIID Policy from 1969 to the present include: (1.) No dry aerosols; (2.) No treatments that enhanced virulence; (3.) No treatments that prolonged viability and stability in nature; and (4.) No treatments that enhanced stability of spores, toxins or bacteria as aerosolizable material. Any encapsulation of virulent spores would lead to improved survivability and lethality. This would be offensive bioweapons research and a violation of the BWC. And thus forbidden at Fort Detrick.

In a word, the FBI investigation lacked ept. - Mod.MHJ]
See Also
2014
---
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: GAO report 20141222.3048707
2013
---
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: spore characteristics 20130125.1514939
2012
---
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): chemical RFI 20120513.1131856
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: chemical evidence 20120510.1129210
2011
---
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (09): further commentary 20111102.3258
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (08): spore characteristics 20111017.3112
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (07) 20111010.3034
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (06): comment 20110914.2798
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (05): possible chronic symptoms 20110913.2788
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (04) 20110721.2203
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (03): more questions 20110521.1545
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): ongoing questions 20110223.0601
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA: Nat'l Research Council rep. 20110216.0511
and other postings in the archives back to 4 Oct 2001
.................................................sb/mhj/je/sh
</body>
