<header id=004240>
Published Date: 2019-08-09 09:31:34 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Palytoxin - UK: coral poisoning
Archive Number: 20190809.6613396
</header>
<body id=004240>
PALYTOXIN - UK: CORAL POISONING
*******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 7 Aug 2019 11:45 BST
Source: Daily Mail [abridged, edited]
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-7331193/Mother-34-dies-family-quarantine-coral-poisoning.html


A mother nearly died cleaning out the family fish tank as she was overcome by the world's 2nd deadliest toxin.

[The 34-year-old woman] had to be put into isolation for 48 hours and have her home sealed off by a Hazardous Area Response Team after she was poisoned by coral.

Doctors battled to save her from palytoxin, a chemical released by the living organism when it comes under attack.

It causes severe and potentially fatal respiratory distress, for which there is no antidote. Medics were able to stabilise her with IV fluids and antibiotics.

Her husband and their 3 daughters also had to be put in a lock-down ward, suffering similar but less severe symptoms, as did the paramedics who took them to hospital from their home in Newport, Telford, Shropshire.

Ambulances bringing in other patients to Princess Royal Hospital, Telford, were directed to Shrewbury instead to avoid further contamination.

[The woman], who'd never even heard of palytoxin, is still unable to eat due to an inflamed stomach from the exposure on 30 Jul 2019 and is calling for warning leaflets to be handed out whenever coral is sold.

She developed a raging fever less than an hour after she finished scrubbing the coral from an ornamental bridge in their small, 58-litre [15.3 gal] marine aquarium.

[The woman] began shivering, shaking, and hallucinating from the effects of the poison after she and her husband, 50, decided to clean the tank and replace marine fish with tropical varieties.

Within a couple of hours of scrubbing the bridge under hot water she developed a sore throat. As she became more breathless and feverish she searched the internet and discovered coral can release a devastating toxin. Both she and her husband developed a cough within a short time of each other.

But cases are so rare that at first neither the non-emergency 111 service nor the doctors who treated her believed she was suffering anything more serious than a viral infection.

'I was shaking from head to toe,' she said. 'I had blankets on me and I was freezing. My heart rate had gone sky-high, and my temperature was really high.

'Later on the doctors told [us] if we'd gone to sleep that night we wouldn't have wakened.

'When I got into bed I couldn't touch myself I was so hot. I thought I was going to die. I've had nightmares ever since and I can't sleep. I've had a crap time.'

She said neither she nor [her husband] had any idea the coral in their tank was a potential killer.

'We bought the coral and didn't have a clue -- they don't give you any danger leaflets or anything like that,' she said. 'You should be told about the toxins so you can know what you're touching and how to clean it.

'I didn't have a clue. We've had this fish tank for 12 months and always kept the coral underwater. 'We completely emptied the tank, took out the coral and started scrubbing it. When you scrub it, because it's alive, it lets off toxins.

'All sorts of things were going through my mind,' she said. 'My kids could have died. We could have died. I've not slept properly since.

'We had gone on holiday and our fish had died, so we decided to get rid of the tank. We completely emptied the tank and started scrubbing it. When you scrub it, it lets off toxins. The house had to be completely cordoned off by the police and fire brigade.

'About 10 minutes after cleaning the tank, I started to get a really dry cough. I said to MS 'I have a sore throat coming', he said the same thing. We left it an hour, and I started getting really bad shivers. My temperature went up to 42.5 C [108.5 F]. We called 111 and they sent an ambulance.

'It was terrifying. The paramedics who came to get me were wearing masks. The whole A&E was isolated. They told us if we'd gone to sleep, we wouldn't have woken up.'

[The woman] was the most severely affected, followed by [her husband] and their 3 girls, 11,7, and one. Their 14-year-old son was staying with a cousin and was unaffected.

[The woman] initially called the 111 service. 'I'd Googled coral poisoning and had been frightened to death by what I read. I phoned 111 for advice and they said take paracetamol. They thought it was just a virus. She said it sounded like a viral infection. She said go to bed and said she would phone back in half an hour to check.

'She called back sooner than that and by then I was shaking from head to toe. I had blankets on me and I was freezing. She sent an ambulance for me. [My husband] was suffering but he wasn't as bad. I'd had much more direct exposure because I'd been at the sink scrubbing it under the hot tap.'

When medics realised they were dealing with a case of palytoxin they sent another ambulance to collect [the husband] and the 3 girls, as well as [the woman's mother] who had been to the house. They were all feeling unwell, suffering cramps, vomiting, and diarrhoea.

The paramedics who brought them in, as well as the crew who had earlier transported [the woman], and were by then at home and sleeping, also had to be brought in and isolated.

'We were all [in] one room and nobody was allowed in,' said [the woman]. 'Anybody treating us wore masks and overalls and we couldn't leave for at least 24 hours.

'It was just absolutely petrifying. Our home was cordoned off and had to be deep-cleaned before we were allowed back in (on 2 Aug 2019). They took our keys off us and they let off some sort of smoke bombs to get rid of the toxins.

'People need to know what they're dealing with if they have a marine fish tank. Nobody seems to know how dangerous coral can be and we only found out the hard way.

'They should hand out leaflets when they sell coral, warning of the dangers. It nearly killed us and I don't want people to go through what we went through.'

What is palytoxin and how you can protect yourself?
Palytoxin is a poison 2nd only to maitotoxin in terms of toxicity.

It is an intense vasoconstrictor, meaning it contracts the muscular walls of blood vessels. This leads to a narrowing of the vessels.

Palytoxin exposure can also break down skeletal muscle.

Cases of poisoning by palytoxin are extremely rare and dangerous.

But if you are exposed, you may spot the following symptoms: bitter/metallic taste, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy, tingling, slow heart rate, kidney failure, impairment of sensation, muscle spasms, tremor myalgia, cyanosis, and respiratory distress.

Certain types of coral release it into the air as a defense mechanism when they are under attack.

One gram of palytoxin can kill 80 people.

The last known UK case of palytoxin poisoning from an aquarium before this one, was in Steventon, Oxfordshire, in March 2018, when a family of 6 and 4 firefighters needed hospital treatment.

Here's how you can guard against the toxin:
Keep handling of corals to a minimum; do not handle coral with your bare hands; wear protective eyewear and thick rubber gloves, not latex; always handle it under water; bag the rock and water at a distance from aquarium lighting and seal the bag before removing from your aquarium; make sure the coral is always submerged; avoid breaking, cutting, scrubbing, scraping, and brushing coral or using boiling water or chemicals; avoid splashing nearby surfaces when changing tank water as it can contain palytoxin.

[Byline: Sebastian Murphy-Bates]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[These individuals are very fortunate to be alive. This is a rapid acting toxin.

"Palytoxin is one of most potent marine toxins known. It was isolated first from corals located in the South Pacific. Originally it was thought that the toxin was made by the corals; now, however, it is known that the toxin is made by a dinoflagellate and that the corals concentrate the toxin. It is estimated that the lethal dose for a human is less than 5 micrograms. Palytoxins are stable in seawater and alcohols.

"Extensive pharmacological research has determined that palytoxin is not a neurotoxin. It instead acts on the sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) pump, effectively "locking" it in an open position. This allows for the diffusion of sodium and potassium across the cell membrane and effectively disrupts the normal intracellular ion gradient. Without the gradients of these ions, cells are unable to function or maintain their shape.

"Symptoms are rapid, with death occurring within minutes.
- Cardiovascular: an initial symptom may be chest pain from coronary vasoconstriction. This may lead to cardiac ischemia and myonecrosis of cardiac cells. An electrocardiogram may demonstrate peaked T waves or ST segment elevation. Loss of consciousness can ensue as hypotension predominates, and there is reduced cerebral perfusion.
- Respiratory: shortness of breath and wheezing can occur.
- Gastrointestinal: there are no specific gastrointestinal effects.
- Other: hemolysis may occur as cell membranes become permeable to various ions, red blood cells swell, and membranes rupture. This results in decreased oxygen-carrying capacity. Death is thought to result from hypoxia and shock.

"There is no effective treatment for palytoxin poisoning. Supportive care, such as supporting respirations, providing intravenous fluids for hypotension, and antiarrhythmics, may provide some benefit. There are animal studies that have used isosorbide to treat the intense vasoconstriction from this toxin, but these studies have demonstrated this treatment is likely to be ineffective.

Extracted from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/neuroscience/palytoxin

A second publication has slightly different information on this toxin:
"Palytoxin is a potent vasoconstrictor that acts on the cellular sodium-potassium pump, which can lead to cell death (4). It causes a range of effects in animals and humans, depending on the route of exposure (5,6). The dose at which 50 percent of exposed animals die following intravenous administration of palytoxin (LD50) has been shown to be as low as 0.033 µg/kg body weight (6). Higher concentrations are required to cause effects following incidental contact depending on whether the exposure occurs through dermal, inhalation, or oral routes (5). Based on reports in the medical literature (7) and online forums (3), most aquarium-related exposures occur after subjecting zoanthids to prolonged handling and appear to be related to inhalation or to skin exposures through cuts on the hands and fingers in persons who maintain these types of aquariums. Throughout the Mediterranean region, palytoxin exposure has been linked to fever, conjunctivitis, and respiratory symptoms in persons exposed to marine aerosols during proliferations of palytoxin and palytoxin-like compound-producing marine algae (that is, algal blooms) (5), but detailed inhalation studies in animal models are lacking. No antidote is available for palytoxin; treatment is supportive.

"Zoanthids (class Anthozoa, subclass Hexacorallia, order Zoanthidia [colonial anemones]) are common in home aquariums. They are considered relatively easy to keep and are often recommended to new aquarium owners. Some types of colonial anemones form large aggregations encrusting a hard substrate. In an aquarium, these aggregations often require thinning or removal. Because of the way these organisms attach to surfaces, aggressive methods are sometimes required for their removal, including cutting, scraping, applying chemicals, or scalding with hot water, which lead to an increased potential for palytoxin exposure, often through the presumed production of aerosols (7). Other potential exposure routes include direct contact with eyes, through skin lesions, and incidental ingestion. Although not all zoanthids contain palytoxin, some zoanthids commonly found in home aquariums contain high concentrations of this toxin (2). Some coral enthusiasts appear to be able to maintain them without ill effects, likely through proper handling, aquarium management, and decontamination practices. Palytoxin can be neutralized by soaking the coral for 30 minutes in a 0.1 percent or higher household bleach solution (1 part 5-6 percent sodium hypochlorite [household bleach] to 10 parts water, prepared fresh) (8). Contaminated items should be soaked in diluted bleach before disposal (3).

"Palytoxin is known to some coral hobbyists (3), and some aquarium shops display signs warning that some coral might be very toxic. However, no US regulations govern the testing or labeling of coral that might contain toxins, including palytoxin. Regulations for the importation of corals currently enforced by the US Fish and Wildlife Service pertain to endangered species and reflect ecological concerns (9). General recommendations on coral handling and decontamination practices would be helpful for hobbyists, commercial coral growers, and the public health and clinical provider communities.

"Currently, no official evidence-based recommendations exist for proper personal protective equipment use for coral hobbyists and aquarium shop staff, and development of such recommendations might be helpful. Activities that could potentially produce aerosols (such as, scrubbing or using hot water to remove zoanthids) should be undertaken with caution. Until data from controlled inhalation experiments in an animal model are available, this apparent link between palytoxin and inhalation toxicity will remain associative and evidence-based recommendations on appropriate respiratory protection or handling best practices will not be possible.

References:
1. Moore RE, Scheuer PJ. Palytoxin: a new marine toxin from a coelenterate. Science 1971; 172: 495-8.
2. Deeds JR, Handy SM, White KD, Reimer JD. Palytoxin found in _Palythoa_ sp. zoanthids (Anthozoa, Hexacorallia) sold in the home aquarium trade. PLoS One 2011; 6:e18235.
3. Reef Central Online Community [Internet]; http://www.reefcentral.com/forums/index.php?s
4. Hilgemann DW. From a pump to a pore: how palytoxin opens the gates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 386-8.
5. Tubaro A, Durando P, Del Favero G, et al. Case definitions for human poisonings postulated to palytoxins exposure. Toxicon 2011; 57: 478-95.
6. Wiles JS, Vick JA, Christensen MK. Toxicological evaluation of palytoxin in several animal species. Toxicon 1974; 12: 427-33.
7. Sud P, Su MK, Greller HA, Majlesi N, Gupta A. Case series: inhaled coral vapor--toxicity in a tank. J Med Toxicol 2013; 9: 282-6.
8. CDC. Guidelines for work with toxins of biological origin. In: Biosafety in microbiological and biomedical laboratories (BMBL), 5th ed. (appendix I). Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2009.
9. US Fish and Wildlife Services [Internet]. Coral. Washington, DC: US Fish and Wildlife Services, International Affairs; 2015; http://www.fws.gov/international/animals/coral.html."

Extracted from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6431a4.htm.
- Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of United Kingdom: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6613396,65178]
See Also
2018
----
Palytoxin - UK: coral poisoning susp. 20180331.5720596
2017
----
Haff disease - Brazil (03): clinical evidence 20170623.5122669
.................................................sb/tg/mj/jh
</body>
