<header id=020872>
Published Date: 2022-04-25 19:20:09 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (05): UKHSA,children, poss adenovirus 2021-22
Archive Number: 20220425.8702847
</header>
<body id=020872>
HEPATITIS, UNDEFINED - USA, EUROPE (05): UKHSA, CHILDREN, POSSIBLE ADENOVIRUS, 2021-2022
****************************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 25 Apr 2022
Source: UK Health Security Agency [abridged, edited]
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1071116/acute-hepatitis-technical-briefing-1_3_.pdf


Investigation into acute hepatitis of unknown etiology in children in England: Technical briefing
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Only parts of the briefing are included here; the entire document can be read at the above URL. - Mod.LL]

Introduction
------------
The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) is working with the National Health Service (NHS) and the public health agencies of the 4 nations to investigate the potential cause of an unusually high number of acute hepatitis cases being seen in children in the past few weeks. There is no known association with travel, and hepatitis viruses (A to E) have not been detected in these children. Unless otherwise stated, this technical briefing uses data cut-off of 20 Apr 2022 to allow time for analyses. Please note more recent case numbers have been cited publicly (114 UK cases as of 21 Apr 2022); however, the small number of new cases have not yet been included in the analyses described here.

Summary
-----------
As of 20 Apr 2022, there have been 111 cases of acute non-A-E hepatitis with serum transaminases greater than 500 iu/l identified in children aged under 16 years old, since 1 Jan 2022. This is the result of an active case-finding investigation in April 2022 which identified prospective as well as retrospective cases. No cases resident in the UK have died.

Eighty-one cases are resident in England, and the rest of the investigation data concerns cases from England only. This briefing is produced to share data useful to other public health investigators and academic partners. Although a detailed clinical case review is also taking place, that data is not shared here as, given the small number of cases, there are some risks to confidentiality.

The cases are predominantly under 5 years old. The clinical syndrome often begins with gastroenteritis-type symptoms, followed by the onset of jaundice. From the information available, 43 cases resident in England have recovered; 7 cases have received a transplant. Trawling questionnaires have not revealed any obvious common exposures. Detailed clinical case review is underway.

Fifty-three cases have been tested for adenovirus, of which 40 have adenovirus detected. SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in 10 of 60 patients, and other pathogens are detected at lower levels. The detection of SARS-CoV-2 at this level is not unexpected given the community prevalence across the period of the investigation and based on the limited available information that there is no evidence implicating a new variant of SARS-CoV-2.

Preliminary typing of the adenovirus has been consistent with type 41F where data is available from blood samples; however, other adenovirus types have also been identified in non-blood samples. Whole-genome sequencing from multiple cases is essential before the characterization of the virus can be confirmed. This is in process, although the low level of adenovirus present in blood means that data quality has been challenging. There is also a marked exceedance of adenovirus in routine laboratory data, primarily driven by enteric samples and the 1-4 year-old age group, although there are also exceedances seen in many other common gastrointestinal and respiratory viral infections at present, likely due to behavioral change and population susceptibility after a period of low incidence during the pandemic.

The leading hypothesis at present is that the hepatitis is linked to adenovirus. The mechanism of liver injury may be virally mediated or may be an immunopathology. There may be a cofactor causing a normal adenovirus to produce a more severe clinical presentation in young children, such as increased susceptibility due to reduced exposure during the pandemic, prior SARS-CoV-2 or other infection, or a yet undiscovered coinfection or toxin. Alternatively, there may have been emergence of a novel adenovirus strain with altered characteristics.

UKHSA has convened an expert group of NHS and academic partners to steer a comprehensive investigation. Rapid pathogen, toxicology, and host investigations are underway, including in partnership with the International Severe Acute Respiratory and emerging Infection Consortium (ISARIC) Clinical Characterisation Protocol for those investigations where a research framework is appropriate.

1.2 Summary data on cases in the UK
-----------------------------------
As of 20 Apr 2022, there are 111 confirmed and possible cases in the UK. Of these, 81 cases are resident in England, 14 in Scotland, 11 in Wales, and 5 in Northern Ireland (Figure 1). Between 21 Jan and 18 Apr 2022, 10 children in the UK meeting the case definition have required liver transplantation. From here on, all confirmed and possible cases will be referred to as cases.

[Figure 1 can be seen at the original URL. It shows cases by week and UK nation, 1 Jan 2022 to 20 Apr 2022. For the 1st 11 weeks of the year [2022], 5-6 cases per week per reported (week is based on hospitalisation date where available, then date of arrival at emergency care department where available, then date of presentation to healthcare) with week 12 = 15 cases, week 13 = 24 cases, and week 14 = 19 cases, demonstrating an upswing of reporting, in part likely due to increased surveillance. The date is not onset of symptoms. - Mod.LL]

2.1 Cases in England
---------------------
As of 20 Apr 2022, there are 81 cases in England. There are no epidemiologically linked cases in England; 34 potential cases in England are awaiting classification pending further data. Cases are predominantly aged between 3 and 5 years old (53: 65.4%), median age 3 (interquartile range 3 to 4.5), and 54.3% are female. The majority are of white ethnicity (49 out of 56: 87.5%) where information was available.

2.2 Outcomes
--------------
Clinical outcomes for the 81 cases in England (at time of clinical notification or interview with parent or guardian) are shown in Table 1. All cases are being followed up for outcome at 28 days after presentation to health services. No cases have died. Seven of the 81 cases have required transplantation. It should be noted that the case definitions require high transaminases, and it is possible that there are milder cases which have not been reported. This possibility is being explored through alternative datasets.

Table 1. Outcomes for 81 cases in England on 20 April 2022
[Status] / Number / Percentage
Died / 0 / 0.0
Discharged or fully recovered* / 43 / 53.1
Currently hospitalised or unknown discharge status / 38 / 46.9
------------------
Total cases / 81 / 100
*Includes 3 transplanted cases

2.3 Clinical features
----------------
The most common presentation reported in cases was jaundice (60 out of 81: 74.1%) followed by vomiting (59 out of 81: 72.8%). Pale stools were also frequently reported (58.0%). Gastro- intestinal symptoms were commonly reported at presentation including diarrhoea (49.4%) and nausea (39.5%). Additionally, lethargy (55.6%), fever (29.6%), and, less frequently, respiratory symptoms (19.8%) were reported. Note that the denominator includes those who have reported the symptom, absence of symptom, and unknown (missing information). Clinical case data including histopathology is being gathered and reviewed by an expert group.

3.1 Potential pathogens detected through routine clinical testing
-----------------------------------------------------------
Cases have been tested for pathogens at or around the time of admission. Test choice is a local clinical decision, and not all cases have been tested for the same pathogens (from 8 Apr 2022, UKHSA recommended a panel of tests to perform on all cases). However, SARS-CoV-2 should be tested on all hospital admissions. Testing information is gathered from a variety of sources, including direct reports from clinicians, direct reports from laboratories, information from UKHSA reference laboratories, and linkage to data sources including second generation surveillance system (SGSS) and the COVID-19 unified sample dataset.

Testing patterns vary by pathogen, with more testing information being available for adenovirus, SARS-CoV-2, Epstein-Barr virus, and Cytomegalovirus. Adenovirus was the most common pathogen detected in 40 of 53 cases that have been tested, followed by SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 2). [For all figures and tables, see original URL. - Mod.LL]

The proportion of cases (January to April [2022]) with SARS-CoV-2 positive at admission amongst those tested was 16%, compared to approximately 5-8% community positivity per week in 2-6-year-olds in March to April 2022 (Office for National Statistics (ONS). The population cumulative seropositivity is likely to be much higher in the age groups we are investigating, noting it was 47% in 1-4-year-olds and 67% in 5-11-year-olds in January through February 2022 (UKHSA Paediatric sero-surveillance data - unpublished). There are no equivalent community prevalence data for adenovirus. Figure 3 shows the epidemic curve of adenovirus and SARS-CoV-2 detections in cases.

3.2 Adenovirus
---------------
Adenovirus was the most common pathogen detected in 40 of 53 cases that have been tested. The acute hepatitis pattern is not known to be typical of adenovirus infection in immunocompetent children, although testing for adenovirus may not be routinely undertaken. By sample type based on the data report, adenovirus was detected more commonly in blood /serum samples than in stool or respiratory samples; however, a consistent sample set has not been tested for most cases.

Eleven cases with adenovirus in blood have been successfully subtyped, and all of these are type 41F. Typing was not successful in all samples, and other adenoviruses were detected in some non-blood samples from cases. Further investigative work, including whole-genome sequencing of multiple cases, is required before any firm conclusions can be drawn on characterization of the adenoviruses involved.

Adenovirus DNA levels in blood/serum samples were noted to be approximately 12-fold higher in those who had received a liver transplant versus those who did not receive a liver transplant, although timing of the samples is variable with respect to onset and deterioration.

Adenovirus whole-genome sequencing as well as metagenomic sequencing have commenced on case samples. The low levels of adenovirus present in blood are challenging for recovery of high-quality genomes. There are currently very limited whole-genome adenovirus sequence data available in the public domain, particularly for enteric adenoviruses. Academic and clinical centres which have or can generate adenovirus whole-genome sequencing data are asked to share consensus genomes to an international nucleotide sequence database collaboration such as GenBank to assist characterisation of circulating adenovirus strains internationally.

3.3 SARS-CoV-2
---------------
Ten cases, on admission, tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, of 61 cases with available test data (16%); 7 of those had also tested positive in the 6 weeks prior to admission. Serology is being undertaken to explore prior infection further. However, the high population cumulative prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 will make the interpretation of this data challenging. Three cases were co-infected with adenovirus and SARS-CoV-2.

SARS-CoV-2 result is based on polymerase chain reaction or lateral flow device results. Information on antibody testing for SARS-CoV-2 is currently pending.

Four cases that have a positive test result for SARS-CoV-2 also have associated variant information. In 2 cases, genotyping indicated a probable omicron lineage, and in a further 2 cases, whole-genome sequencing identified VOC-22JAN-01 by the UKHSA definition (BA.2 and sublineages).

Acute hepatitis is not a common feature of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children. Data provided by ISARIC's COVID-19 Clinical Information Network - CO-CIN (February 2020 to March 2022) shows that of 8883 children admitted to hospital with SARS-CoV-2 infection, 2171 (24%) had ALT [alanine transaminase] measured during admission. The decision to test was based on clinical assessment, that is, missing data is not random. A grossly elevated ALT was not a typical feature of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and only 13 of the 2171 children tested had an ALT greater than 500 iu/ml.

Part 4. Cases: Toxicology investigations
------------------------------------
Ninety-seven samples from cases and 75 healthy age-matched control samples have been received. A selection of serum samples was analyzed for organic compounds and whole blood and urines for metals. Four analysis protocols are being undertaken utilizing liquid chromatography/high resolution mass spectrometry (LC/HRMS) to target substances with different chemistries: polar and nonpolar, each with positive and negative ionisation for organic molecules and metabolites. Gas chromatography / mass spectrometry (GC/MS) is being used for volatile and semi-volatile organics, and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) for metals. The LC/HRMS gives a qualitative report of the organic masses which are compared against a variety of databases to derive possible substance identification. Identified substances are compared between healthy controls and cases to determine potential substances of interest. Potential acute hepatotoxic substances identified can then be compared to a reference standard, if this is available, for confirmation of identification and quantitative assessment.

To date, 16 controls and 11 cases have gone through full liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and GC/MS data acquisition in all modes, and the data is currently being analyzed against the databases. The 1st samples were from late illness and yielded hundreds of organic substances consistent across patient samples, but many are related to the pathophysiology such as bile acids and bile salts. The samples now under analysis are from earlier stages of illness. These are likely to be more informative with greater likelihood for causative substances still being present and less 'interference' from pathophysiological biochemistry.

A small number of urines and whole bloods have been analyzed by ICPMS for metals, and these have not shown any metals of interest in the cases. Some toxicants are well known for causing liver toxicity, in particular paracetamol and aflatoxin B1. Standards have been obtained to facilitate investigation.

Interaction between adenovirus and SARS-CoV-2
---------------------------------------------
COVID-19 data and microbiological data for other organisms from SGSS were linked using various demographic variables. Interactions were explored to understand whether infection with adenovirus in the general pediatric population has preceded infection with SARS-CoV-2, co- infected, or was a secondary infection within 27 days or more delayed secondary infection to 59 days after a SARS-CoV-2 episode. This analysis is limited by ability to link across demographic variables but gives a sense of whether there has been a more recent increase in infection with SARS-CoV-2 and adenovirus.

The data show that between October 2020 and March 2022, there has been a rise in both preceding, co-, and secondary infections among children under 10. Similar rises have been seen for other childhood infections too (see Figure 9).

Part 6. Working hypotheses
-------------------------
6.1 Working hypotheses (in order of best to worst fit to data)

1. A cofactor affecting young children which is rendering normal adenovirus infections more severe or causing them to trigger immunopathology. The cofactor may be:
- a. susceptibility, for example due to lack of prior exposure during the pandemic
- b. a prior infection with SARS-CoV-2 or another infection, including an omicron restricted effect
- c. a coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 or another infection
- d. a toxin, drug, or environmental exposure

2. A novel variant adenovirus, with or without a contribution from a cofactor as listed above.

3. A drug, toxin, or environmental exposure.

4. A novel pathogen either acting alone or as a coinfection.

5. A new variant of SARS-CoV-2.

Part 7. Planned investigations into etiology
---------------------------------------
UKHSA convened a clinical and technical expert group including epidemiology, virology, hepatology, pediatrics, infectious diseases, and immunology specialists. This group, led by UKHSA, will steer a comprehensive investigation and will receive and review data from the component studies. The investigations include clinical case investigation in the NHS, public health pathogen investigations, and research investigations under the International Severe Acute Respiratory and Emerging Infection Consortium (ISARIC) Clinical Characterisation Protocol with full appropriate consent. ISARIC is funded by UK Research and Innovation and the National Institute for Health Research.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[More information is given here, and even more so in the original URL, regarding the timing of English cases, the testing for adenovirus, and SARS-CoV-2 and toxicology data. This is clearly an investigation in progress of an as yet not-well-defined cause of severe hepatic disease in young, otherwise well, children. Much more information is needed. It is not at all unlikely that many more, but less severe, cases have been occurring. The working hypotheses are quite interesting, and at this point, adenovirus serotype 41 is leading the field as the etiology with a poorly defined cofactor in the equation. - Mod.LL

ProMED map:
England, United Kingdom: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8702847,279]
See Also
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (04): WHO, children, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220424.8702811
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (03): CDC, children, poss adenovirus, 2021-22 20220421.8702752
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe (02): Israel, children, possible adenovirus, 2021-22 20220420.8702720
Hepatitis, undefined - USA, Europe: children, possible adenovirus, RFI 20220415.8702636
Hepatitis, undefined - UK: children, RFI 20220406.8702449
2021
----
Non-viral hepatitis - USA (02): bottled water, fatal, recall 20210523.8377404
Non-viral hepatitis - USA: (NV) bottled water susp 20210429.8334840
.................................................ll/tw/lxl
</body>
