<header id=018222>
Published Date: 2013-04-18 12:01:05 EDT
Subject: PRO> Obituary: Roy W. Chamberlain
Archive Number: 20130418.1655508
</header>
<body id=018222>
OBITUARY: ROY W. CHAMBERLAIN
****************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 18 Apr 2013
From: Charles Calisher <calisher@cybersafe.net> [edited]


Roy William Chamberlain (1916-2013)
-----------------------------------------------
We have lost another of the exceptional arbovirologists of the past generation. Dr. Roy W. Chamberlain, pioneer medical entomologist and virologist, died on 12 Apr 2013, after a brief illness, in Atlanta, Georgia.

Roy was born in Stanton, California on 24 Jul 1916. He obtained his Bachelor of Science degree from Montana State College (now Montana State University) in 1942 and a Doctor of Science degree in parasitology from the Johns Hopkins University in 1949.

When the (now) United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was established by the United States Public Health Service as the Communicable Disease Center in Montgomery, Alabama, the new organization wisely hired Roy in 1949 as an entomologist. He held various positions there and at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta throughout his distinguished career. He was Chief of the Arbovirus Vector Laboratory from 1949 until 1967. He was then Chief of the Arbovirus Infections Unit, 1967 to 1968. He became Deputy Chief of the Virology Division from 1969 until 1981.

Chamberlain had studied composition when he was in college, and it showed in his later contributions to the scientific record. A clear thinker, his entomologic contributions were enormous. He was able to combine scholarly work on mosquitoes with studies of mosquitoes that are relevant to public health. He recognized that both were needed and that academic knowledge of mosquito behavior life cycles is necessary for an understanding of the epidemiology of the viruses they transmit.

Merging these interests, Chamberlain and W. Daniel Sudia, in collaboration with other public health workers at CDC and entomologists and virologists elsewhere, conducted experimental infections with colonized mosquitoes, combined their laboratory results with results of their extensive field work and produced fundamental information. Together with Sudia, they invented the battery operated CDC miniature light trap for the collection of mosquitoes, a device which revolutionized the collection of these and other insects [and is still in use today]. They also wrote a classic manual of methods for the collection and processing of medically important arthropods for arbovirus isolation, which they also had translated into Spanish. With others, they invented the entomological chill table, which preserved the infectivity of viruses while arthropods were being sorted and identified. This device significantly improved virus isolation successes from field collected material. They realized that they could use sublimating dry ice to enhance the catch of blood-seeking insects attracted to a source of carbon dioxide. Collectively, these advances singularly propelled the advancement of arbovirology and defined its application; the contributions of these 2 men cannot be overstated.

In addition to his understanding of the history and development of arbovirology, Roy had the capacity to be reflective, insightful, and creative in regard to various basic concepts that might explain the characteristics, distribution, and persistence of arboviruses.

Roy was a member of many professional organizations including the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, the Sigma Xi honor society, and the American Mosquito Control association. He received the Richard M. Taylor award in 1975, a triennial award given to a person who has made outstanding contributions to arbovirology.

Roy was as meticulous in his oversight of the groups that he directed as he was in his personal life. He enjoyed performances of the Atlanta opera and was active in their support group, and he gardened and maintained a beautifully landscaped home in Atlanta. In retirement, he kept abreast of the field in regular meetings of a group of other retired entomologists and retirees in related fields.

Roy is survived by Mildred, his wife of 68 years.

Here is a sample of Chamberlain's many publications:
Chamberlain RW, Sudia WD. 1961. Mechanism of transmissions of viruses by mosquitoes. Ann Rev Entomol 6:371-390.
Sudia WD, Chamberlain RW. 1962. Battery operated light trap, an improved model. Mosq News 22(2):126-129.
Sudia WD, Chamberlain RW, Collier, MI. 1965. The CDC entomological chill table, a refrigerated unit for use in processing mosquitoes for virus isolation studies, Mosq News 25(4):385-389.
Newhouse VF, Chamberlain RW, Johnston JG, Sudia WD. 1966. Use of dry ice to increase mosquito catches of the CDC miniature light trap. Mosq News 26(1):30-35.
Sudia WD, Chamberlain RW. 1967. Collection and processing of medically important arthropods for arbovirus isolation. Center for Disease Control, PHS, USDHEW, Atlanta, GA, 29pp.
Chamberlain RW. 1959. Arthropod-borne encephalitis. Procedures for investigating outbreaks. Center for Disease Control, PHS, USDHEW, Atlanta, GA, 27pp.

--
Charles H. Calisher, Ph.D.
Professor Emeritus, Arthropod-borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO
<calisher@cybersafe.net>

[It is always sad when we lose a true pioneer in the field of arbovirology and medical entomology. ProMED-mail thanks Charles Calisher for providing the overview of Roy Chamberlain's career and his many significant contributions. - Mod.TY]

.................................................ty/msp/ml
</body>
