<header id=015369>
Published Date: 2020-07-08 16:36:31 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anaplasmosis - USA: (MI) human, pets, 2019
Archive Number: 20200708.7554657
</header>
<body id=015369>
ANAPLASMOSIS - USA: (MICHIGAN) HUMAN, PETS, 2019
************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

As if we don't already have already have enough worries, health officials are warning Michiganders to guard against a tick-borne disease that mimics COVID-19 symptoms. Anaplasmosis is still rare in Michigan, but the number of cases reported yearly in the state is on the rise.

There were 12 documented cases of anaplasmosis in Michigan reported to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services [MDHHS] in 2019. Michigan has seen an increase over the last 6 years, with only 4 cases reported in 2014.

The symptoms are very much like those reported with the coronavirus: fever, chills, fatigue, body aches, headaches, and maybe a little fatigue. People experiencing those range of symptoms are advised to seek medical attention.

This year [2020], trying to avoid a tick bite and its side effects may be harder than normal. The blood-sucking ticks are increasing because of the mild winter, which was followed by warmer temperatures. State health officials were seeing tick bites as early as December [2019] and January [2020], so they recommend avoiding tick habitat and to take preventive measures.

The biggest worry about tick bites in recent years has been Lyme disease, which can cause skin rash, headache, fatigue, fever, and, in some instances, long-term debilitating damage to joints, the heart, and the nervous system.

It's important to note the differences between COVID-19 and anaplasmosis, according to Dr. Paige Armstrong, who leads the U.S. Public Health Service epidemiology team of the Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch. Early treatment is recommended, especially when trying to distinguish the 2 diseases.

Armstrong says COVID-19 can come with congestion and losing taste or smell, which is not found in anaplasmosis. It is uncommon, but anaplasmosis can cause respiratory problems such as shortness of breath and coughing, said Armstrong.

Armstrong says to see a healthcare provider immediately if signs of fever, headache, muscle aches, or fatigue are present. It is also important to let the healthcare provider know of any recent tick bites.

Ticks are small bugs that latch on to the body and suck the blood out of both humans and pets. Oftentimes, they remain on the body and have to be removed by tweezers.

Annually, there are 4000-6000 cases of anaplasmosis reported, and it is most common in the Northeast and upper Midwest because of the presence of blacklegged ticks, Armstrong said.

The blacklegged ticks, often called deer ticks in Michigan, can transfer Lyme disease and many other pathogens. The American dog tick and the blacklegged tick are the most common in Michigan, said MDHHS epidemiologist Kim Signs.

Dr. Jim Fredericks, chief entomologist for the National Pest Management Association, says it's easier said than done to prevent tick bites, but there are measures people can take to stay safe.

"It's a good idea to avoid tick habitat," said Fredericks. "There are some places more likely to have ticks."

Those places include overgrown weeds, the edges of trails, tall grass areas, and in the woods. Fredericks added people are spending more time outdoors this year [2020] because of the coronavirus outbreak, which may be an additional cause of the increase.

It is recommended to use an Environmental Protection Agency-registered tick repellent, said Fredericks. The EPA registration means the repellents is not harmful, has been tested, and is effective.

Other preventative methods include tucking or taping your pants into your hiking socks and wearing light-colored pants, said MDHHS medical entomologist Emily Dinh. Epidemiologist Dr. Signs says people should shower and check their bodies thoroughly after being outside to remove any loose ticks. [The size of the tick does not matter. It may be as small or smaller than the head of a pin and can still transmit disease. - Mod.TG]

Clothing and other camping tools can be placed in a dryer for about 10 minutes to kill any additional ticks.

Your pets
---------
Dr. John Howe, president of the American Veterinary Medical Association, says blacklegged ticks can transmit anaplasmosis to dogs and, less commonly, to cats.

"In fact, U.S. veterinarians are seeing an increase in cases of canine anaplasmosis, which rose from 117 203 in 2015 to 207 825 in 2019," said Howe in an email statement.

Howe says pets with anaplasmosis may experience lack of appetite, joint pain, fever, lethargy, or lameness.

When it comes to pets, Dr. Signs recommends checking the pet if it has been outside, just as a person would be checked. To search for ticks, it is recommended to look under the pet's collar, eyelids, ears, groin, armpits, feet and tails [and of course, the belly. - Mod.TG]

"If you have a pet and they go outside, you should talk with your veterinarian about what products are available to help prevent ticks and fleas on your pets in the summer," said Signs.

Howe says to remove ticks from pets using tweezers [or a product called a tick key, which is safer and does not crush the tick - Mod.TG] while avoiding twisting or crushing the tick. If the tick's particles remain on the pet's skin, it is recommended by Howe to monitor the area and contact a veterinarian.

Dinh adds that human tick repellents should not be used on animals.

[Byline: Chanel Stitt]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Anaplasmosis in people
---------------------
- Signs and symptoms of anaplasmosis typically begin within 1-2 weeks after the bite of an infected tick. Note that tick bites are usually painless, and many people do not remember being bitten.
- See your healthcare provider if you become ill after having been bitten by a tick or having been in the woods or in areas with high brush where ticks commonly live.

Early illness
Early signs and symptoms (days 1-5) are usually mild or moderate and may include:
- fever, chills
- severe headache
- muscle aches
- nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite

Late illness
Rarely, if treatment is delayed, or if there are other medical conditions present, anaplasmosis can cause severe illness. Prompt treatment can reduce your risk of developing severe illness. Signs and symptoms of severe (late-stage) illness can include:
- respiratory failure
- bleeding problems
- organ failure
- death

Risk factors for severe illness:
- delayed treatment
- age: being older puts you at risk
- weakened immune system: People with weakened immune systems (such as those receiving some cancer treatments, individuals with advanced HIV infection, prior organ transplants, or people taking some medications) are at risk for severe illness.
Source: https://www.cdc.gov/anaplasmosis/symptoms/index.html

Anaplasmosis in human beings, also referred to as human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA), is a bacterial disorder transmitted by a species of bacteria named _Anaplasma phagocytophilum_. The condition was earlier referred to as human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE).

Lyme disease and other serious diseases may be transmitted by ticks, but anaplasmosis should also be considered a serious disease. Tick diseases are distressing, uncomfortable, and sometimes deadly in severe cases. Hikers, those working in agriculture, forest workers, or even vacationers take these parasites seriously.

As it's vacation season, and now that people are seeking the outdoors more as the COVID-19 lockdown in many areas is lessening, the ticks will be hungry and anxious for your ankles, legs, and any other place they can crawl to on you or your pet. On humans, ticks easily migrate to where a waistband may be, or even up to your armpits. So be sure to check all of you, even your head.

Anaplasmosis in animals
---------------------
Anaplasmosis is a little different in animals, although it is still transmitted by ticks.

Anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease caused by the infectious bacterial organism _A. phagocytophilum_. It is transmitted through bites of the deer tick (also known as the black-legged tick) and western black-legged tick. A lesser form of anaplasmosis is caused by _Anaplasma platys_ and is transmitted by the brown dog tick. Anaplasmosis has been reported worldwide in a wide variety of animals.

The more common form of anaplasmosis, caused by _A. phagocytophilum_, often causes lameness, joint pain, fever, lethargy (lack of energy, general malaise), and anorexia (lack of appetite). Most infected dogs will have signs for 1-7 days; however, some will have no signs or only minor signs. Less common clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, coughing, and labored breathing. Anaplasmosis is less common in cats, but similar clinical signs can be seen if they do get this disease. Rarely, neurological signs such as seizures have been reported.

Infection with _A. platys_ can cause cyclic thrombocytopenia, a condition where there is a periodic decrease in platelets (circulating cells helping the blood-clotting process). Clinical disease is often mild, but some dogs may develop bruising or bleeding (including nosebleeds), especially during the early stages of infection when platelet counts may be at their lowest.

Dogs with anaplasmosis often have many of the same signs as those with Lyme disease, and infection with both agents (co-infection) is not uncommon. Both Lyme disease and anaplasmosis are commonly found in the same geographic location and are transmitted by the same tick species.

Several types of tests to diagnose exposure or an infection are available. Exposure to _Anaplasma_ spp. can be detected in your veterinary clinic using a special test kit. Other tests, including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), are available to help your veterinarian determine if active infection is present. These tests are sent to an outside lab. In addition, the organism can sometimes be seen through a microscope during peak phases of infection.

Your veterinarian will discuss the various test options and determine which diagnostic protocol is best for your dog's condition.

The treatment for canine anaplasmosis, the antibiotic doxycycline, is the same as for other closely related tick-borne infections, including ehrlichiosis and Lyme disease. Many infected dogs are treated for 2-4 weeks (the longer course more often if co-infected with Lyme disease). In the majority of cases, signs improve rapidly. Dogs are often markedly better 24-48 hours after therapy is begun, and the prognosis for clinical recovery is excellent.

Although most dogs clinically improve, it may be difficult to determine whether or not a dog is no longer infected. If a dog stops producing antibodies to the organism, this may indicate the organism has been cleared from the body. Even if a dog that was infected with anaplasmosis is treated and returns to normal, the dog may continue to test positive for the infection on subsequent blood tests. However, this does not mean the dog has an active infection, and a 2nd round of antibiotic therapy to try to obtain a negative blood test is generally not recommended.

Dogs from areas where anaplasmosis or Lyme disease are common have often been exposed to _A. phagocytophilum_ and have a positive antibody test result. It appears many dogs may have antibodies to _A. phagocytophilum_ without having any evidence of clinical disease. It has been shown that clinically healthy dogs may have persistent infection with _A. phagocytophilum_ and are chronically infected carriers of the organism. We do not know if these dogs will eventually become ill or not.

Current research suggests canine anaplasmosis is an acute disease occurring in dogs 1-2 weeks after infection through a tick bite. Because chronic infection has not been directly related to clinical disease, and because a therapeutic regimen effective in clearing the organism from an infected animal has not been established, treating clinically healthy, positive-testing animals is of questionable benefit and not generally recommended at this time.

However, a positive test result in a clinically healthy dog should not be disregarded. At a minimum, positive dogs should have an aggressive tick control program implemented to minimize exposure to ticks. It is clear that co-infection with 2 or more tick-borne agents is common, and dogs co-infected with Lyme disease (_Borrelia burgdorferi_), _A. phagocytophilum_, and _Anaplasma_ are nearly 2 times more likely to develop clinical disease than dogs infected with either agent alone. Your veterinarian will recommend a tick preventive best suited for your dog.

There is also some concern that chronically infected carrier dogs could be adversely affected by medications comprising the immune system (such as steroids), or by an illness possibly reducing a dog's immune status. Source: https://vcahospitals.com/know-your-pet/anaplasmosis-in-dogs - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map:
Michigan, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=7554657,225]
See Also
Anaplasmosis - Canada: (NS) horse 20191106.6765532
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: information, corr. 20190604.6502926
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: information 20190603.6500934
2018
----
Anaplasmosis, human granulocytic - USA: (NYC) ex transfusion, 2017 20180627.5879347
2017
----
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: information 20171012.5375168
2016
----
Anaplasmosis - USA (02): (KY) bovine 20161023.4578597
2013
----
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: (NC) 20131108.2044573
2012
----
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA (02)(OH) 20120421.1109601
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: (OH) 20120420.1107673
2010
----
Anaplasmosis, bovine - USA: (KS, NE, IA) 20100918.3376
2008
----
Anaplasmosis, human granulocytic - USA: (MN), ex transfusion 2007 20081024.3362
.................................................sb/tg/tw/jh
</body>
