<header id=034975>
Published Date: 2011-05-26 09:49:24 EDT
Subject: PRO> Hepatitis C virus: canine homolog
Archive Number: 20110526.1608
</header>
<body id=034975>
HEPATITIS C VIRUS: CANINE HOMOLOG
*********************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 24 May 2011
Source: Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, press
release [edited]
http://www.mailman.columbia.edu/academic-departments/centers/discovery-canine-hepatitis-c-virus-opens-new-doors-research-deadly-huma


Discovery of canine hepatitis C virus opens up new doors for research
on deadly human pathogen
----------------------------------------------------------------------
In a study published online this week in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) [see reference below], researchers
report the discovery of a novel hepatitis C-like virus in dogs. The
identification and characterization of this virus gives scientists new
insights into how hepatitis C in humans may have evolved and provides
scientists renewed hope to develop a model system to study how it
causes disease.

The research was conducted at the Center for Infection and Immunity
(CII) at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health, the
University of Edinburgh, the Center for the Study of Hepatitis C, and
Pfizer Veterinary Medicine.

Human hepatitis C virus (HCV) affects approximately 200 million
people worldwide. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 3.2 million people in the United States are
chronically infected. The majority of these patients do not know they
are carrying the virus, thus serving as a source of infection for
others. HCV, which can cause liver disease and liver cancer, is most
often transmitted following large or repeated exposure to infected
blood. Persons who use injection drugs; are HIV-positive; or are
children of infected mothers have the highest risk of infection.

The discovery of canine hepatitis C virus (CHV) suggests that the
virus may have been introduced into human populations through contact
with dogs or some other related species more than 500 years ago, long
after the domestication of dogs.

CHV belongs to a group of viruses known as hepaciviruses, which also
includes GBV-B, a virus that causes hepatitis in tamarins, small
monkeys from Central and South America. Among these viruses, HCV is
most closely related to its canine counterpart, a finding that
surprised first author Dr Amit Kapoor, an investigator in the Center
for Infection and Immunity (CII) and assistant professor of
pathology.

"Considering the origin of HIV," Dr Kapoor explains, "we expected to
find the closest homologs, or genetic relatives, of HCV in non-human
primates. However, while we were analyzing samples from dogs involved
in outbreaks of respiratory disease, we came upon a virus that was
more similar to HCV than other viruses of the same family. So far, we
have only detected CHV in sick animals, a few of which had died of
unknown causes. Because of its close genetic similarity to HCV, we
suggested the name of canine hepacivirus."

According to Dr Charles Rice, scientific and executive director of
the Center for the Study of Hepatitis C at The Rockefeller University
and one of the collaborators involved in the study, "the origins of
HCV remain a mystery. These findings underscore the need to look
beyond primates for clues to the origins of HCV."

Viral zoonoses, infections that are transmitted from animals to
humans, account for about 70 percent of human emerging infectious
diseases. Although transmission between species is uncommon, sustained
contact over time can increase the likelihood that a virus adapted to
infect humans will evolve. Since their domestication about 10 000
years ago, dogs have been close human companions. Whether humans and
dogs were independently infected with an ancestral virus by another
species or whether dogs infected humans (or vice versa) cannot be
determined from this study. There is no current risk that dogs can
infect humans with either HCV or CHV.

Using a sequencing platform provided by Roche 454 Life Sciences and
state-of-the-art-molecular techniques, Dr Kapoor, together with
scientists at the University of Edinburgh, The Rockefeller University,
and Pfizer, determined that like HCV, CHV's genome contained RNA
secondary structures called GORS that allow viruses to chronically
infect their natural hosts. Moreover, the sequence of genes that
encode proteins involved in virus infection and replication were very
similar between HCV and CHV.

Until recently, studies into how hepatitis C causes disease in humans
have been limited by the lack of animal and cell culture models.
According to CII director Dr Ian Lipkin, "The identification and
characterization of CHV signals the advent of a new tractable animal
model for hepatitis C. This discovery provides new tools for
understanding how this virus causes disease, and will facilitate drug
and vaccine research and development."

--
Communicated by:
Daniela Hernandez
<dfh2101@columbia.edu>

[The publication referred to in this press release was published
online in the PNAS Early Edition for 23 May 2011 to 24 May 2011.
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2011/05/24/1101794108.abstract.

A Kapoor, P Simmonds, G Gerold, et al: Characterization of a canine
homolog of hepatitis C virus

Abstract
--------
"An estimated 3 percent of the world's population is chronically
infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). Although HCV was discovered
more than 20 years ago, its origin remains obscure largely because no
closely related animal virus homolog has been identified; furthermore,
efforts to understand HCV pathogenesis have been hampered by the
absence of animal models other than chimpanzees for human disease.
Here we report the identification in domestic dogs of a nonprimate
hepacivirus. Comparative phylogenetic analysis of the canine
hepacivirus (CHV) confirmed it to be the most genetically similar
animal virus homolog of HCV. Bayesian Markov chains Monte Carlo and
associated time to most recent common ancestor analyses suggest a mean
recent divergence time of CHV and HCV clades within the past 500-1,000
y, well after the domestication of canines. The discovery of CHV may
provide new insights into the origin and evolution of HCV and a
tractable model system with which to probe the pathogenesis,
prevention, and treatment of diseases caused by hepacivirus
infection."

ProMED-mail thanks Daniela Hernandez for drawing attention to this
significant discovery. She commented further that this study is the
first to document this virus outside humans and non-human primates and
suggests that hepatitis C may have been introduced into human
populations through contact with dogs after they were domesticated. It
is important to note that there is no current risk that dogs can
infect humans with either the canine or the human version of the
virus. The discovery and characterization of this novel virus was made
using the 454 Roche unbiased sequencing system. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2004
----
Hepatitis C virus, blood supply - South Korea (02) 20040402.0900
Hepatitis C virus, blood supply - South Korea 20040330.0869
2003
----
Hepatitis C virus, hospital acquired - Israel (03) 20030816.2038
Hepatitis C virus, hospital acquired - Israel (02) 20030814.2025
Hepatitis C virus, hospital acquired - Israel 20030813.2016
2002
----
Hepatitis C virus, clinic-acquired cluster - USA (NE) 20021017.5579
2001
----
Hepatitis C virus, nosocomial transmission - UK 20010531.1072
Hepatitis C virus, vaccine research 20010522.0994
2000
----
Hepatitis C virus, perinatal transmission risk - UK 20000918.1605
Hepatitis C virus, risk assessment 20000726.1243
.................................................sb/cp/mj/lm
</body>
