<header id=048550>
Published Date: 2014-06-27 15:56:11 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed illness, workers - South Korea
Archive Number: 20140627.2568938
</header>
<body id=048550>
UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS, WORKERS - SOUTH KOREA
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 25 Jun 2014
Source: The Washington Post [edited]
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/samsung-is-koreas-greatest-success-but-some-workers-say-its-making-them-sick/2014/06/25/87c01f82-1dd0-4e52-aa52-63ccac3900d1_story.html


When [the female victim of this report] finished high school and got a job at Samsung, her family celebrated with a barbecue. But within 2 years, she began having major health problems. Then doctors found a brain tumor, something she and her family claim came from toxins at a factory run by the South Korean tech giant. She and her mother are among a small group of Koreans who say there's a dark side to this country's most iconic conglomerate. They say conditions at a Samsung Electronics production plant caused hundreds of rare diseases over the past 2 decades, some fatal, with most victims in their 20s or 30s.

The fight between Samsung and dozens of former workers persisted for years on the fringes. But recently, Samsung apologized in a nationally televised news conference for its "lack of attention" to the pain and distress of former employees with the unusual illnesses. "The employees are like our family, and the company would like to offer help when the family is in trouble," said the spokeswoman, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue. "Instead of looking into whose fault it is, we try to give help first." Samsung declined to discuss this victim's case. A company spokeswoman said that in the West, apologizing could be seen as an admission of responsibility. [Yet the company has offered an apology. There seems to be a conflict here. Are the workers family, or are they only a means to an end? - Mod.TG]

There's no clear proof linking the diseases with factory conditions. Samsung said in a statement to The Washington Post that it is "meeting or exceeding" industry health and safety standards and emphasized a series of safety innovations that it called "best-in-class." But some politicians and activists here say the employees' health problems highlight the faults of a company that emphasized productivity over safety and prevented the formation of workers' unions.

For those who have pushed Samsung to acknowledge the diseases, the recent apology was a partial vindication, coming after years in which Samsung questioned their credibility. Samsung promised compensation for victims but pointedly did not claim responsibility. Samsung is known globally for its televisions and smartphones, but within Korea, its influence is broader -- that of a do-everything titan that sells life insurance, builds apartments, and accounts for 1/5 of the nation's gross domestic product.

Those who study Samsung say the company is increasingly sensitive to blemishes on its image as its ailing chairman, Lee Kun-hee, prepares to pass the reins to his only son. "The social mood is changing in Korea, and I think Samsung sensed that," said an economist at Hansung University who specializes in the conglomerate. "The [rare diseases] had become a symbolic problem for Samsung. It was starting to be seen as a very arrogant and stubborn company."

Concern about Samsung's factory conditions first surfaced 7 years ago, when 2 former employees who had worked side by side, and both died of leukemia within months of each other. One victim was 23, and her father, a taxi driver, felt the deaths couldn't be a coincidence.

In the years since, about 200 other people have claimed sicknesses from Samsung production lines, mostly from the Giheung plant 20 miles [32 km] south of Seoul, which manufactures semiconductors and liquid crystal displays.

But the claims are complicated. Most mainstream medical experts say that the causes of brain tumors and leukemia are essentially unknown. Still, there are some factors that can increase the risk, including exposure to radiation and benzene. The US Department of Health and Human Services says "long-term exposure" to high levels of benzene can cause leukemia and some cancers.

Like other high-tech manufacturers, Samsung uses potentially harmful chemicals on its production lines, but not at levels exceeding safety standards, according to studies that the company has permitted of its workplaces. Samsung questions the results of a Seoul National University study that found benzene in samples collected at the Giheung facility, saying it does not use that substance on its production lines.

In part because of that ambiguity, South Korea's government-run workplace compensation agency has sent conflicting signals about whether it thinks the claims are legitimate. In 4 cases, the agency has determined that the diseases were workplace accidents, the result of chemical exposure, according to Lee Jong-ran, a lawyer who represents many of those who have fallen ill.

But in 23 other cases, including this victim's, the agency said there was no clear correlation. Those workers have appealed to the courts, where they've squared off against the compensation agency and faced yet another challenge -- Samsung has lent its high-profile lawyers to the government to help with its defense. (Samsung said in May 2014 that it would withdraw its lawyers from the cases.)

The diseases were reported by people employed by Samsung in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and the company has since revamped its Giheung plant. Still, several employees who worked there say Samsung for too long paid insufficient attention to worker safety. During occasional power outages, air filtration systems would shut down. Work would stop temporarily, but resume before the gases were entirely cleared, they said.

"It's very expensive to stop a [production] line for a long time," said a former Samsung engineer who worked at Giheung from 2004 until 2006 and is in good health. "After even a brief power outage, you'd smell the chemicals very strongly" as people got back to work.

Most of the workers at Giheung were women, recent high school graduates. During the one-month orientations held for newcomers, they were told about the history of the company and the apartments they'd one day be able to afford, according to several former employees. They were given detailed instructions on how to keep the production line clean, an essential for semiconductor manufacturing. But they were told almost nothing about safety or the chemicals they'd be dealing with, they said.

"All we learned was how to be an efficient worker," said a worker, who joined Samsung at 19 and has multiple sclerosis, a disease she says is workplace-related. "The emphasis was on the product, not the people."

In a statement, Samsung said that even dating to the 1990s, 10 of 200 mandatory education hours for employees were devoted to safety. Employees were instructed on how to handle chemicals and deal with accidents. Samsung also said that in 2007, it implemented a round-the-clock chemical monitoring system, and that out of an "abundance of caution," chemical levels were kept to 1/10 of legal limits.

[This victim], who left Samsung in 2001, developed the menstruation problems while still at the company. But her more serious health issues emerged later; her brain tumor was diagnosed in 2005. In a 2012 blog post, Samsung noted that some ex-employees' illnesses surfaced well after they left the company, making it difficult to draw a link.

[This victim] can't tell her own story. She has full comprehension, but she can barely speak -- only a few words now and then. After years of physiotherapy, she can dress herself, but she cannot button her shirts. She cannot write. She can talk on the phone, but only if her mother holds it to her ear.

For all the attention that the claims against Samsung have received in recent months, those dealing with diseases have suffered in private for years. In this victim's case, the best-case scenario is that she'll "one day be able to walk to the dinner table," her mother said.

After doctors discovered this victim's tumor, she underwent high-risk surgery. She emerged from the 12-hour operation alive, but much different. Her arms flailed uncontrollably and she couldn't lift her head. She had quadruple vision.

It was only in 2008 that the mother heard about the other, comparable cases. Friends told her that fighting Samsung was a lost cause, given its political power and clout with the news media. But the mother joined a growing group of victims and their relatives who held memorial services and brandished banners in front of Samsung's headquarters. She sold a restaurant she owned and became a full-time caretaker for her daughter. A group representing the families has paid her medical bills over the past 2 years.

Both the government agency and a Seoul administrative court have ruled there's no confirmable link between this victim's condition and her time at Samsung. But the mother says she's "100 percent sure" there is. There is no family history of brain tumors or other rare diseases, and this victim never showed health problems before taking her job at Samsung, her mother said.

The mother is now hoping to receive compensation from Samsung in a negotiation process. Her goals are simple. She wants to outfit her apartment with grasp bars and other devices that can help her daughter more easily live at home.

"I want Samsung to think about all the years my daughter cannot work," the mother said. "She will need help for the rest of her life."

[Byline: Chico Harlan; Yoonjung Seo contributed to this report]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Sometimes overwhelming circumstances constitute a type of proof. The issue that workers may have been ill, and such illness forced them to leave the company and then the illness became worse, should not excuse the company from seeing the link. Furthermore, some chemicals may not have their deleterious effects right away.

The whole story appears to be a case of company vs victim, as there are conflicting accounts between company and victims. But while it may be a powerful company, the number of victims is mounting and the only thing in common appears to be the company.

A serious investigation of which chemicals are used and an examination of the levels of these chemicals and how long workers are exposed is critical. There also appear to be chemicals which in combination may be causing illnesses that have not been seen before. - Mod.TG

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=2568938,21585.]
See Also
2008
----
Toxic chemicals, outdated - Russia: (Primorye) 20081230.4107
Colony collapse disorder, apis - Germany: chemical ban 20080613.1868
Chemical contamination, sunflower oil - Spain ex Ukraine: RFI 20080428.1458
Chemical contamination, water - Zambia (Copperbelt): RFI 20080107.0093
2004
----
Poisoning, chemical powder - Brazil (Rio de Janeiro) 20040408.0949
2000
----
Japanese encephalitis, chemical fertilizer - India 20001221.2249
.................................................tg/mj/jw
</body>
