<header id=012433>
Published Date: 2020-10-07 12:51:47 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed death, horse - USA: (NC)
Archive Number: 20201007.7843801
</header>
<body id=012433>
UNDIAGNOSED DEATH, HORSE - USA: (NORTH CAROLINA)
************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 6 Oct 2020 09:19 EDT
Source: Paulick Report [edited]
https://www.paulickreport.com/horse-care-category/horses-in-north-carolina-dying-from-mystery-illness/


New Hope Stables in North Carolina has had 4 horses die from a mystery illness that veterinarians cannot isolate or explain. Treasure, an 18 year old rescue horse used in the stable's lesson program, was the 1st horse afflicted and was originally suspected to be colicking when barn workers found him down on 23 Sep 2020. When the veterinarian arrived, however, it was apparent Treasure was not colicking, but the horse was experiencing gastrointestinal irritation. The gelding was sent to Woodside Equine Clinic in Richmond, Virginia, where he deteriorated and was euthanized.

On 28 Sep 2020, several other horses at the farm became ill and 3 died. Three horses remain in the clinic, and nearly half of the farm's stable is on intravenous fluids.

Treating veterinarian Dr Shanna Edwards has asked colleagues all over the USA for opinions; thus far, no conclusive diagnosis has been reached, even after a necropsy of one of the horses.

Affected horses have diarrhea, colic and fever and become bloated and lethargic. Edwards suspects a toxin may be in the horse's hay, grain or water because every horse in the farm is affected, which doesn't typically happen with an infectious disease. The farm has stopped using their well water and has brought in new hay and grain.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[My first thought when I read this story was ionophore toxicity. The articles I have read do not indicate that ionophores have been ruled out. However, they are now examining the feed. Ionophores could have accidently been mixed in the feed, either on the farm or at the processing plant of the feed.

While the article above indicates the veterinarians are now looking at feed, because this illness does not seem to have spread past this one stable, feed seems like a likely component to rule out. Laboratories don't usually test for this unless requested and the proper sample is sent in. It is easy to overlook feed when contagious diseases are suspected.

I would hope they would rule out blister beetles in hay as well. The blister beetle toxic agent cantharidin can be tested for in the stomach contents. (Additional information on blister beetles follows ionophores, below.)

Ionophores modify the movement of ions across the membranes of rumen microbes. There are many ionophores; the most commonly known have names like monensin, lasalocid, salinomycin and narasin. Many biological responses to ionophores have been reported, but they can be consolidated into 7 categories or modes of action. The modification of volatile fatty acid production is one widely recognized category of great importance. This shift in volatile fatty acids results in improved feed efficiency. Some ionophores also function as coccidiostats [antiprotozoal agents that act upon coccidia parasites]. Generally, ionophores are used in the cattle industry.

However, ionophores are toxic to the heart of equines. Different ionophores vary in their toxicity to the horse. Monensin is one of the more toxic ionophores. This type of toxicity does not occur often, and is sometimes the result of a feed mixing error.

Extracted from https://ker.com/equinews/ionophore-toxicity-horses/:
Clinical signs of ionophore toxicity in horses often include sudden death. Other clinical signs are colic, weakness, unsteady gait, diarrhea, and excessive urination. Blood work will usually reveal elevated muscle enzymes. Animals acutely poisoned may show no clinical signs other than sudden death.

There is no specific treatment for ionophore toxicity. Any feed suspected of being contaminated should be collected immediately and no longer fed. If horses are known to have recently ingested ionophores, treatment to flush stomach contents and minimize absorption is indicated. Supportive care such as intravenous fluids and pain relief is given to surviving animals. Vitamin E and selenium may help to offset muscle damage. The overall prognosis for ionophore toxicity in horses is poor to grave.

Horses that survive ionophore toxicity may have permanently impaired heart function. Electrocardiograms and echocardiograms can help to assess heart function and determine if horses can be put back into work.

It is essential any cattle or chicken feed containing ionophores be stored away from horse feed and not fed where horses can have any access to it. Feed manufacturers are vigilant to ensure there is no cross-contamination when horse feed is produced in the same facility as ionophore-containing feeds. Suspect feed can be tested for the presence and level of ionophore contamination by several different laboratories.

---
Blister beetles contain the toxic agent cantharidin. Cantharidin produces painful lesions in the mouth, esophagus, stomach, intestines, and even the bladder. (The article above does not mention any examination of the mouth.)

Horses may be affected because they are fed alfalfa hay, one of the beetles' favorites. However, these beetles also like certain flowering weeds and can be found in other hays, especially clover or mixes. Therefore, cattle, goats and sheep may also be affected, with similar clinical signs and outcomes as those of the horse. Emus and ostriches will eat the beetles and suffer the same fate.

Cantharidin is odorless and colorless, so it is important to monitor alfalfa hay for early detection of the blister beetles or their parts, as a preventive measure. If gone unnoticed within the alfalfa hay, once ingested it is highly irritating, causing acantholysis (loss of intercellular connections) of the gastrointestinal tract, especially of the esophagus and nonglandular portion of the stomach, and of vesicles in skin or mucous membranes of horses. Cantharidin acts by altering mitochondrial metabolism via its inhibition of protein phosphatase, which is involved in the control of cell proliferation, activity of membrane-associated channels and receptors, and modulation of protein kinases and phosphatases. The inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A causes an increase in permeability of endothelial cells in a time- and concentration-dependent fashion by enhancing the phosphorylation of endothelial regulating proteins.

Clinical signs begin to appear 6-8 hours after ingestion of cantharidin. The affected horse may experience colic due to the irritation and vesicle formation in the gastrointestinal tract or because of decreased contractility, hypomotility, and ileus. Also, it may be restless, irritable, sweating, have diarrhea, and/or submerge its muzzle in water (a common sign of cantharidin toxicosis). Cantharidin toxicosis also causes mucosal hemorrhage and inflammation of the urinary tract, which may manifest itself as signs of hematuria, stranguria (difficultly urinating) and/or dysuria (painful urination). The cardiovascular system is less frequently affected, but clinically a horse may present with synchronous diaphragmatic flutter (SDF; thumps, hiccup-like contractions of the diaphragm). This is caused by alteration in membrane potential of the phrenic nerve and its discharge in response to electrical impulses generated during myocardial depolarization. The nervous system is less commonly affected, but an affected horse may present with aggressive behavior, seizure-like muscle activity secondary to colic, or muscle fasciculations. Most commonly, the horse presents with colic, depression, fever, dehydration, gastritis, esophagitis, and oral ulcers.

Laboratory findings can also be helpful in diagnosing cantharidin toxicosis. Serum calcium is usually markedly decreased and may remain low for prolonged periods. This hypocalcemia may be manifested clinically as SDF, tremors, or abnormal facial expressions, such as clamped jaws with lips drawn back. The serum magnesium concentration is also usually low, while creatinine kinase can increase markedly within the first 24 hours after ingestion. In acutely affected horses, urinalysis reveals markedly decreased specific gravity, often less than 1.101, and hematuria with or without myoglobinuria. Also, in acute cases, horses are frequently hyperglycemic, and analysis of peritoneal fluid may reveal increased protein, greater than 4 g/dL, with normal numbers of white blood cells and fibrinogen levels. If the toxin has caused renal tubular necrosis and/or hypoproteinemia, there may be increases in serum urea nitrogen, approximately 50-70 mg/dL, and increases in creatinine, approximately 2-10 mg/dL. Total protein may be normal or increased during the first 24 hours but then drops dramatically. Most commonly, the horse's laboratory findings include hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, and azotemia.

Cantharidin toxicosis can be confirmed using high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) to detect and quantify cantharidin in the urine of live or dead horses and in the gastric contents, liver, or kidneys of dead horses. It is best to submit at least one pint of stomach contents or 20 mL of urine on ice for analysis.

At necropsy, erosions in the oral cavity, esophagus, and stomach may be seen, as well as ulcerated to pseudomembranous enteritis. The most commonly reported gross pathologic lesions include necrosis and ulceration of the squamous lining of the distal esophagus, forestomach, and urinary bladder.

There is no specific antidote for cantharidin toxicosis, so the treatment is usually directed at cantharidin removal, reduction, and immediate symptomatic therapy. The fatality rate can be as high as 65%, but with aggressive therapy can be reduced to 20%. Horses with a toxic dose can die within 3-18 hours of onset, but if they survive for 72 hours, recovery is more likely. Calcium and magnesium supplementation for prolonged periods is almost always indicated, but their administration should be carefully monitored and linked to serum chemistries. If the horse is exhibiting signs of gastritis, often indicated by submerging the muzzle in water repeatedly, sucralfate can be administered as a protectant. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can alleviate pain and protect against endotoxemia but should be used with caution because NSAIDs are toxic to the kidney if the horse is dehydrated and if renal damage has occurred. The horse should also be stall-rested for 5-10 days.

Prevention is the most effective way to avoid cantharidin toxicosis. The 1st cutting of hay is often free from blister beetles because the adults do not emerge until late May or June (in the southwest and southern plains, if cut before mid-May). Also, it is important not to crimp the hay during cutting so that the beetles can escape rather than get trapped and incorporated into the hay. Cutting the alfalfa at 10% or less can decrease the chance of poisoning because beetles are attracted to flowering plants. Scouting the fields for beetles and treating with a short residual insecticide before cutting helps to prevent blister beetle infestation. Sevin XLR has been used for prevention of infestation by blister beetles and other toxic insects. Carbaryl and parathion have also been commonly used to kill blister beetles but have a pre-harvest waiting period that does not give them adequate residual activity to kill blister beetles that enter the field from spray time until just before harvest.

Blister beetle, or cantharidin, toxicosis is an important disease that should be considered when horses present with colic or acute death soon after ingestion of alfalfa. A definitive diagnosis may be determined if there is a history of feeding alfalfa or alfalfa-containing products, laboratory findings of hypocalcemia with or without hypomagnesemia, identification of blister beetles in hay or GI contents, and gross identification of ulcers in the distal esophagus, stomach and urinary bladder on necropsy. Confirmation using HPLC to determine the presence and amount of cantharidin in stomach contents or urine can be used. In order to prevent cantharidin toxicosis, proper cutting of alfalfa, surveying of fields and use of an insecticide, if necessary, are recommended.

Portions of this comment were extracted from https://www.addl.purdue.edu/newsletters/2006/Fall/EquineCT.htm. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of North Carolina, United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=7843801,235.]
See Also
2017
---
Ionophore intoxication, swine - Israel: salinomycin, maduramicin 20170404.4948069
2015
---
Ionophore intoxication, equine - USA (02): (CA) monensin conf 20151114.3791577
Ionophore intoxication, equine - USA: (CA) susp, RFI 20150926.3671968
Blister beetle poisoning, equine - USA: (NC) 20150922.3661751
2014
---
Ionophore intoxication, equine - USA: (FL) fatal, monensin 20141218.3040606
2010
---
Blister beetle (Nairobi fly) - Liberia: (CM) RFI 20101125.4252
.................................................sb/tg/rd/sh
</body>
