<header id=005933>
Published Date: 2013-04-08 13:09:29 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Dengue - worldwide
Archive Number: 20130408.1631126
</header>
<body id=005933>
DENGUE - WORLDWIDE
******************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[Following are a report published in Nature and 2 subsequent reports providing additional detail and comments. - Mod.TY]

[1] Nature: worldwide report
[2] Nature article: review and summary
[3] India and worldwide

******
[1] Nature: worldwide report
Date: Sun 7 Apr 2013
Source: Nature [edited]
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12060.html

Ref: Bhatt S, Gething PW, Brady OJ, et al: The global distribution and burden of dengue. Nature 2013 (epub ahead of print) doi:10.1038/nature12060

Abstract
--------
Dengue is a systemic viral infection transmitted between humans by _Aedes_ mosquitoes. For some patients, dengue is a life-threatening illness. There are currently no licensed vaccines or specific therapeutics, and substantial vector control efforts have not stopped its rapid emergence and global spread. The contemporary worldwide distribution of the risk of dengue virus infection and its public health burden are poorly known. Here we undertake an exhaustive assembly of known records of dengue occurrence worldwide, and use a formal modelling framework to map the global distribution of dengue risk. We then pair the resulting risk map with detailed longitudinal information from dengue cohort studies and population surfaces to infer the public health burden of dengue in 2010. We predict dengue to be ubiquitous throughout the tropics, with local spatial variations in risk influenced strongly by rainfall, temperature and the degree of urbanization. Using cartographic approaches, we estimate there to be 390 million (95 per cent credible interval 284-528) dengue infections per year, of which 96 million (67-136) manifest apparently (any level of clinical or subclinical severity). This infection total is more than 3 times the dengue burden estimate of the World Health Organization. Stratification of our estimates by country allows comparison with national dengue reporting, after taking into account the probability of an apparent infection being formally reported. The most notable differences are discussed. These new risk maps and infection estimates provide novel insights into the global, regional and national public health burden imposed by dengue. We anticipate that they will provide a starting point for a wider discussion about the global impact of this disease and will help to guide improvements in disease control strategies using vaccine, drug and vector control methods, and in their economic evaluation.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2] Nature article: review and summary
Date: Sun 7 Apr 2013
Source: Science Daily [edited]
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/04/130407133241.htm


The global burden of dengue infection is more than triple current estimates from the World Health Organization, according to a multinational study published today [7 Apr 2013] in the journal Nature.

The research has created the 1st detailed and up-to-date map of dengue distribution worldwide, enabling researchers to estimate the total numbers of people affected by the virus globally, regionally and nationally. The findings will help to guide efforts in vaccine, drug, and vector control strategies.

The study was led by Professor Simon Hay, a Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow at the University of Oxford, as part of the International Research Consortium on Dengue Risk Assessment, Management and Surveillance.

Dengue, also known as 'breakbone fever', is a viral infection that is transmitted between humans by mosquitoes. In some people, it causes life-threatening illness.

There are currently no licensed vaccines or specific treatments for dengue, and substantial efforts to control the mosquitoes that transmit the disease have not stopped its rapid emergence and global spread. Until now, little was known about the current distribution of the risk of dengue virus infection and its public health burden around the world.

Dr Samir Bhatt, who led the modelling for the study, says: "Our aim was to take all of the evidence that is currently available on the distribution of dengue worldwide and combine it with the latest in mapping and mathematical modelling to produce the most refined risk maps and burden estimates. We then hope to use this knowledge to help predict the future burden of the disease."

The findings reveal that dengue is ubiquitous throughout the tropics, with local spatial variations in risk influenced strongly by rainfall, temperature and urbanisation. The team estimate that there are 390 million dengue infections across the globe each year, of which 96 million reach any level of clinical or subclinical severity. This is more than triple the WHO's most recent estimates of 50-100 million infections per year.

Professor Simon Hay explains: "We found that climate and population spread were important factors for predicting the current risk of dengue around the world. With globalisation and the constant march of urbanisation, we anticipate that there could be dramatic shifts in the distribution of the disease in the future: the virus may be introduced to areas that previously were not at risk, and those that are currently affected may experience increases in the number of infections. "We hope that the research will initiate a wider discussion about the significant global impact of this disease."

Of the 96 million apparent infections, Asia bore 70 per cent of the burden. India alone accounted for around one-third of all infections. The results indicate that with 16 million infections, Africa's burden is almost equivalent to that of the Americas and is significantly larger than previously appreciated. The authors suggest that the hidden African dengue burden could be a result of the disease being masked by symptomatically similar illnesses, under-reporting, and highly variable treatment-seeking behaviour.

Professor Jeremy Farrar, Director of the Wellcome Trust Viet Nam Research Programme and Oxford University Clinical Research Unit Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Viet Nam, explains that the map and estimates produced by Hay's group set the benchmark for the disease: "This is the 1st systematic robust estimate of the extent of dengue. The evidence that we've gathered here will help to maximise the value and cost-effectiveness of public health and clinical efforts, by indicating where limited resources can be targeted for maximum possible impact.

With endemic transmission in Asia and the Americas, recent outbreaks in Portugal [Madeira Island, not continental Portugal - Mod.TY], the ever-increasing incidence in Africa, and the challenges of making an effective dengue vaccine or controlling the vector, Professor Farrar stresses: "This really does represent a crucial period in the global spread of dengue."

Jimmy Whitworth, Head of International Activities at the Wellcome Trust, said: "Over time, this comprehensive map of global disease burden will also help to demonstrate which control measures are making the biggest difference in reducing the number of people suffering from dengue infection. Without a vaccine or specific treatment options, it's crucial that we understand where best to direct the limited resources available for preventing this resurgent disease."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3] India and worldwide
Date: Mon 8 Apr 2013
Source: The Hindu [edited]
http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/policy-and-issues/india-leads-the-world-in-dengue-burden-nature/article4592098.ece


Dengue, the world's most rapidly spreading mosquito-borne viral disease, is taking a far bigger human toll than was believed to be the case. As many as 390 million people across the globe could be falling victim to the virus each year, according to a multinational study published by Nature on Sunday [7 Apr 2013].

India emerges in the analysis as the country with the world's highest dengue burden, with about 34 per cent of all such cases occurring here.

According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), incidence of dengue has shot up 30 fold in the past 50 years. Its estimate has been that globally there were 50-100 million dengue infections taking place annually.

For their study, Samir Bhatt at the University of Oxford and his colleagues used a map-based approach to model how many dengue cases were occurring in various parts of the world, thereby capturing its global distribution.

They estimated that worldwide, 96 million people suffered each year from 'apparent infections' where the disease was severe enough to disrupt an individual's regular routine. In addition, there were 294 million asymptomatic infections.

With "large swathes of densely populated regions coinciding with very high suitability for disease transmission," Asia bore 70 per cent of the apparent infections that took place, the scientists pointed out in the paper.

Africa contributed about 16 per cent of the global dengue infections and the Americas 14 per cent.

"I consider it to be the most comprehensive study of dengue disease burden to date," said Duane J Gubler, an internationally known expert on the disease, when asked for his views on the Nature paper. The study's estimate of 390 million infections was "much closer to the actual figure than the 50 million WHO is still using," observed Professor Gubler, who is now with the Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School in Singapore. "Considering that mosquito control has failed in all dengue-endemic countries, that over half of the world's population now lives in urban areas, and that dengue is an urban disease, even that number may be too low," he said in an e-mail.

The study estimated that India had the largest number of dengue cases, with about 33 million apparent and another 100 million asymptomatic infections occurring annually.

However "these are estimates and there are many gaps which we now need to fill," cautioned Jeremy Farrar, a senior author of the study, in an e-mail. "But it would not surprise me that India was home to the most dengue [patients] globally."

The model used in the study could help provide a framework to estimate the burden of disease. Inevitably, there were gaps in the data and one needed to extrapolate from other areas. Better data collection should be encouraged so that the estimates were as accurate as possible, said Professor Farrar, who is director of the Wellcome Trust Vietnam Research Programme and Oxford University Clinical Research Unit Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Viet Nam.

"We have a tremendous problem of dengue all over India," said Umesh C Chaturvedi, agreeing with the finding of the paper. A virologist who has studied the disease, he is a scientific consultant to the Indian Council of Medical Research.

[Byline: N Gopal Raj]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[This ground breaking study underscores dengue as an increasing public health problem in the tropical and sub-tropical areas of the world. Although the study's estimate that there are 3 times more dengue cases worldwide than the WHO estimates is not surprising, the study indicates that there is significant underreporting from areas such as India and Africa. Interestingly, ProMED-mail receives limited reports of dengue cases in India and very few from Africa. This moderator has speculated that this is due to lack of effective surveillance backed by laboratory support. The Nature study suggests that this is the case. It will be interesting to see if better surveillance occurs going forward as a result of raised awareness. Development of dengue vaccines and better vector control measures currently underway will continue.

ProMED-mail thanks Kunihiko Iizuka for sending in the reports in Nature and in the Hindu. - Mod.TY]

.................................................sb/mpp/ty/mj/mpp
</body>
