<header id=041756>
Published Date: 2013-08-01 17:09:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hepatitis E - Netherlands: blood donors
Archive Number: 20130801.1858965
</header>
<body id=041756>
HEPATITIS E - NETHERLANDS: BLOOD DONORS
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 1 Aug 2013
Source: Eurosurveillance Edition 2013, 18(31) [summ., edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20550


Silent hepatitis E virus infection in Dutch blood donors, 2011 to 2012
----------------------------------------------------------------------
(By: Slot E, Hogema BM, Riezebos-Brilman A, Kok TM, Molier M, Zaaijer HL.)

Summary
-------
In Europe, the dynamics of endemic hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection remain enigmatic. We studied the presence of silent HEV infection among Dutch blood donors. Using donations collected throughout the Netherlands in 2011 and 2012, 40 176 donations were tested for HEV RNA in 459 pools of 48 or 480 donations. Deconstruction of the reactive pools identified 13 viraemic donors. In addition, 5239 donors were tested for presence of anti-HEV IgG and IgM and for HEV RNA when IgM-positive. Of the 5239 donations, 1401 (27 percent) tested repeat-positive for HEV IgG, of which 49 (3.5 percent) also tested positive for anti-HEV IgM; 4 of the HEV IgM-positive donors tested positive for HEV RNA. HEV IgG seroprevalence ranged from 13 percent among donors younger than 30 years to 43 percent in donors older than 60 years. The finding of 17 HEV RNA-positive donations among 45 415 donations corresponds to one HEV-positive blood donation per day in the Netherlands. For 16 of the 17 HEV RNA-positive donors, genotyping succeeded, revealing HEV genotype 3, which is circulating among Dutch pigs. Apparently, silent HEV infection is common in the Netherlands, which possibly applies to larger parts of Europe.

Introduction
------------
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a non-enveloped RNA virus, classified into 4 genotypes. HEV genotypes 1 and 2 have been found only in humans, whereas genotypes 3 and 4 have also been found in animals. The clinical features of hepatitis E are similar to those of viral hepatitis caused by other hepatotropic [having a special affinity for the liver] viruses. In Europe and North America, hepatitis E is known as an acute disease in travellers returning from tropical countries, but an endemic source of hepatitis E has always been suspected. Recently it became clear that genotype 3 of hepatitis E virus (HEV gt-3) is widely spread among pigs in Europe, North America and Japan. Surprisingly, infection of humans by HEV gt-3 seems to cause disease mainly in immunosuppressed persons, such as patients who have received organ transplants, who may develop chronic hepatitis E. Blood donors can be silently infected with HEV, as indicated by plasma pools testing positive for HEV RNA and by a high prevalence of antibodies to HEV among blood donors in the south west of France]. Cases of transfusion-transmitted hepatitis E have been reported. The dynamics of HEV gt-3 infection and its implications for public health and the safety of blood are largely unknown. Which part of the population has signs of resolved or active infection? To estimate the infection pressure of HEV in the Netherlands, we determined the presence of HEV RNA and HEV antibodies in a large number of recent blood donations, collected throughout the country.

[Interested readers should consult the original text via the source URL to view the methodology, results, graphical presentation of the data obtained by the authors, and the references cited. - Mod.CP]

Discussion
----------
The detection of HEV viraemia in 17 of 45 415 recent Dutch blood donations demonstrates a high incidence of HEV infection in the Netherlands. Our serological screening suggested that roughly one quarter of the Dutch adult population has experienced HEV infection. This proportion compares with the 16 percent of 500 donors in the south-west of Britain, and the 53 percent of 512 donors in the south-west of France, who recently tested positive for IgG anti-HEV, using the same antibody assay as employed in this study. Unfortunately, there is no gold standard for HEV antibody testing. A recent study reports an HEV IgG seroprevalence of only 2.6 percent in 7072 Dutch samples, collected in 2006 and 2007, employing another brand of HEV antibody assay (MP/Genelabs). The Wantai assay used in the present study may suffer from a high level of non-specific reactivity. However, studies comparing the performance of the Wantai and the MP/Genelabs assay demonstrate a higher sensitivity and detection of more sera from PCR-proven cases by the Wantai assay. Classical anti-HEV serology probably lacks sensitivity and seems unsuitable to confirm Wantai EIA test results. In addition, the frequent finding of HEV RNA-positive donors, a striking age-related increase of HEV IgG seroprevalence, and the fact that already in 2005, HEV was found to circulate on 53 of 97 Dutch pig farms, suggest that the high seroprevalence as detected by the Wantai assay may be correct.

Unfortunately, seroprevalence data for persons under the age of 18 are not available. The striking age-related seroprevalence (Figure 2) is difficult to interpret. The age-dependent seroprevalence may simply reflect a long-standing, stable situation, in which people are evenly exposed to HEV in the course of their life. In that scenario, the current high number of viraemic and seroconverting donors may reflect a temporary elevation of HEV infection pressure. If endemic HEV infection were a recent phenomenon, the age-dependent seroprevalence could only be explained by age-dependent exposure or age-dependent susceptibility, which is difficult to imagine for a food-borne pathogen. Alternatively, the seroprevalence curve could reflect an age-cohort effect, caused by transient exposure of older generations in the past. Such a cohort effect has been described in England. The HEV incidence found in this study of 1 percent per year, as well as the high number of HEV RNA-positive blood donors, seem to contradict transient exposure to HEV in the past; but endemic HEV may have returned after a long period of absence.

HEV transmission by blood transfusion has been reported in Saudi Arabia, Japan, France and the United Kingdom. Our results suggest roughly one HEV viraemic donation per day in the Netherlands. This may be an underestimation, considering that the serological screening of 5239 donors only detected antibody-positive donors in a later stage of infection, while the screening for HEV RNA of 40 176 pooled (diluted) donations detected donors in an early stage of infection, with high levels of HEV RNA and low or absent HEV antibodies. HEV RNA-positive blood may pose a threat to immunosuppressed blood recipients, such as recipients of organ transplants and patients with haematological malignancies; and possibly to pregnant women. Because blood transfusion is only a minor source of HEV infection, the routine screening of blood donations for the presence of HEV does not yet seem warranted. Each immunosuppressed patient with unexplained elevated liver enzymes should be tested for the presence of HEV RNA, irrespective of exposure to blood products. Fortunately, it appears that chronic HEV infection in immunosuppressed patients can be cured by a temporary reduction of immunosuppression, or by antiviral treatment using ribavirin.

The source and transmission routes of HEV gt-3 infection have not yet been uncovered. In contrast to the Midi-Pyrenees region of France, where an association of HEV seropositivity with rural residence was found, the level of urbanisation and the vicinity of pig farms do not play a role in the Netherlands. Until recently, little was known of HEV transmission dynamics in European pig populations. Berto et al. describe the presence of HEV in 8 to 73 percent of stool samples collected from pig farms between 2007 and 2011 throughout Europe, and the presence of HEV in fattening pigs. It is unclear whether pigs are the source of the current HEV infections. Intensive pig farming may have become the major amplifier of the virus, considering that millions of pigs are being reared in the Netherlands each year, of which each year again a large part probably acquires and sheds HEV. Subsequently, HEV may be spread via contaminated meat or via faecally contaminated water used for irrigation. Studies are needed to identify the transmission routes of HEV gt-3 to humans, so that appropriate measures can be taken. It seems likely that at this moment other Western countries also experience extensive, silent HEV infection.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Hepatitis E is a liver disease caused by hepatitis E virus (HEV): a non-enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus. HEV is transmitted mainly through contaminated drinking water. It is usually a self-limiting infection and resolves within 4-6 weeks. Occasionally, a fulminant form of hepatitis develops, which can lead to death. Hepatitis E is found worldwide and different genotypes of HEV determine differences in epidemiology. Genotype 1 is usually seen in developing countries and causes community-level outbreaks, while genotype 3 is usually seen in the developed countries and does not cause outbreaks. Although humans are considered the natural host for HEV, antibodies to HEV and closely related viruses have been detected in primates and several other animal species.

In Europe, the dynamics of endemic hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection remain enigmatic. The authors have studied the presence of silent HEV infection among Dutch blood donors. Genotyping of 16 of the 17 HEV RNA-positive donors revealed the presence of HEV genotype 3, which is circulating among Dutch pigs. (HEV genotypes 1 and 2 have been found only in humans, whereas genotypes 3 and 4 have also been found in animals). The authors estimate that the finding of 17 HEV RNA-positive donations among 45 415 donations corresponds to one HEV-positive blood donation per day in the Netherlands. The authors further conclude that silent HEV infection is common in the Netherlands, a situation which may apply to larger parts of Europe. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1r1l.]
See Also
2012
----
Hepatitis E virus, ferret - Netherlands (02): biosecurity 20120810.1237757
Hepatitis E virus, ferret - Netherlands 20120807.1231416
2011
----
Hepatitis E - France: (SE), autochthonous & food-borne 20110412.1157
2009
----
Hepatitis E - France (02): background 20090918.3274
Hepatitis E - France: (Marseille) pig liver sausage 20090917.3267
.................................................cp/je/dk
</body>
