<header id=050941>
Published Date: 2012-02-16 10:21:33 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Prion disease update 2012 (02)
Archive Number: 20120216.1043716
</header>
<body id=050941>
PRION DISEASE UPDATE 2012 (02)
******************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[With the continuing decline in the number of cases in the human population of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease -- abbreviated previously as vCJD or CJD (new var.) in ProMED-mail -- the scope of the occasional ProMED-mail updates has been broadened to include other prion-related diseases. In addition to vCJD, data on other forms of CJD: sporadic, iatrogenic, familial, and GSS (Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease) are included also since they may have some relevance to the incidence and etiology of vCJD. - Mod.CP]

In this update:
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly statistics not updated as of Wed 4 Jan 2012 - no new vCJD cases.
[2] UK: caprine BSE, comment
[3] Bacterially expressed recombinant protein is infectious
[4] Evaluation of vCJD blood test
[5] Turkey: 1st probable vCJD case
[6] Prions in spleen
[7] Neurotoxic monomer

******
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly statistics not updated as of Wed 4 Jan 2012 - no new vCJD cases.
Date: Thu 16 Feb 2012
Source: UK National CJD Surveillance Unit, monthly statistics [edited]
http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/figures.htm


Refer to ProMED-mail Prion disease update 2012 (01), archive no 20120104.0027 for UK vCJD statistics up to 4 Jan 2012.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] UK: caprine BSE, comment
Date: Wed 4 Jan 2012
From: David Thomson <thomson.david48@gmail.com> [edited]


re: Isolation of prion with BSE properties from farmed goat [ProMED-mail Prion disease update 2012 (01) 20120104.0027, part [2]
------------------------------------------------
It may be relevant to consider the reported rare BSE cases in small ruminants (goats) from a slightly different perspective.

To my knowledge it has not yet been possible to definitively determine the precise origins of BSE affecting cattle, despite it being relatively widely accepted that feeding of inadequately processed, contaminated animal proteins (presumably derived from infected cattle) to cattle resulted in spread, gross amplification, and the large scale outbreak that occurred in the UK after 1986.

Is it conceivable that rather than being a rare disease of goats acquired from exposure to cattle-origin proteins in feedstuffs, BSE might, in fact, have originated as a relatively 'rare' small ruminant TSE that jumped to cattle (via small ruminant origin animal proteins) where it was then capable of much more aggressive spread than in its original source host species?

Given the information in the report that goats in the UK are inherently managed relatively intensively and that they will test positive to BSE if infected with BSE (whereas when sheep are co-infected with BSE and scrapie, they tend to test positive only to scrapie), it may perhaps be significant that there has not been more evidence of BSE infection detected amongst UK goats, especially those now aged animals likely exposed to contaminated feedstuffs during the period before the feed ban was implemented in the UK.

Further retrospective studies of scrapie cases amongst goats predating 1984 (if sufficient material is still available) may be helpful to clarify this issue.

--
David Thomson
DV Grafton, LHPA
Australia
<thomson.david48@gmail.com>

[Can any reader provide information or comment on the presence of BSE in goats in the UK prior to 1984? - Mod.CP]

******
[3] Bacterially expressed recombinant protein is infectious
Date: Thu 12 Jan 2012
Source: Journal of Virology [edited]
http://jvi.asm.org/content/86/3/1874.abstract


[ref: Wang F et al: Genetic informational RNA is not required for recombinant prion infectivity. J Virol. 2012; 86(3): 1874-6]
------------------------------------------
Abstract
--------
Whether a genetic informational nucleic acid is required for the infectivity of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies is central to the debate about the infectious agent. Here we report that an infectious prion formed with bacterially expressed recombinant prion protein plus synthetic polyriboadenylic acid and synthetic phospholipid 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylglycerol is competent to infect cultured cells and cause prion disease in wild-type mice. Our results show that genetic informational RNA is not required for recombinant prion infectivity.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Definitive proof that prions are infectious agents comprised of protein in a misfiled form and devoid of nucleic acid in contrast to all other known infectious pathogens. - Mod.CP]

******
[4] Evaluation of vCJD blood test
Date: Fri 13 Jan 2012
Source: Channel 4 News [edited]
http://www.channel4.com/news/blood-test-breakthrough-for-mad-cow-disease


A blood test for variant CJD is for the 1st time being offered to patients from around the United Kingdom and some from abroad who are suspected of having what was once known as mad cow disease. [A detailed description of this test was posted previously as part [5] of ProMED-mail Prion disease update 2011 (08), archive no 20110905.2710. - Mod.CP]

Channel 4 News has learned that a notification has been sent to neurologists around the country from the NHS [National Health Service] National Prion Clinic and the Medical Research Council's Prion Unit saying that the blood test is now available. Between 5 and 10 samples a week are now being sent in from here and other countries where there have been cases of vCJD.

Professor John Collinge, who has been part of the team developing the blood test, said that so far the test had not produced any false positive results -- that is, where a test shows there is infection when there is none. This is a significant step forward in the fight against the disease.

Channel 4 News has also learned that funding from the Medical Research Council has meant the team has now been able to begin a crucial new phase in assessing the blood test. This involves testing 5000 anonymous samples from the US, supplied from the American Red Cross. America [had] low levels of exposure to BSE and the tests will enable the scientists to assess the false positive rate. This is a significant step forward in the fight against the disease. [However] Prof Collinge said if they find there are a significant number of false positives then "it will be back to the drawing board."

If, on the other hand, the test works [that is, finds no false positives], then the next step will be to screen 50 000 anonymous UK blood donors which would allow the 1st accurate assessment of how many people in this country are carrying the disease.

Recent studies from tonsil samples show that possibly one in 4000 people in the UK or 15 000 in total may be infected with the [prion associated with] the disease, although some tests have put the numbers slightly higher.

The latest figures from the Health Protection Agency show that there have so far been 176 definite or probable cases of vCJD since it was first detected in humans in 1995 until the end of 2011. Channel 4 News understands that there was a [single] "cluster" of deaths at the end of a year in which 4 people died.

Variant CJD [vCJD] is a human form of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) which first emerged in Britain in 1986 as a result of beef offal being fed to cattle. The prions which are responsible for BSE and vCJD were found in the brains, spinal cords, and spleens of cows. When the meat was mechanically recovered, and turned into the likes of hamburgers and baby food, the prions entered the human [food] chain.

Variant CJD is a cruel disease which causes a form of dementia, affecting both the brain and nervous system. It has a long incubation period and mainly affects young people. The majority of deaths have been in those in their 20s, although there have been exceptions.

The development of a possible blood test was announced last February 2011 in a scientific paper published in The Lancet. Permission has now been given by UCLH [University College London Hospitals], the hospital trust to which Prof Collinge and his team are attached, to start a clinical evaluation in patients in whom a diagnosis of vCJD is suspected.

Currently blood undergoes leucodepletion, which involves the removal of the white blood cells. But this does not remove all the prions [cells carrying prions] and there have been several cases of people infected with vCJD after receiving blood products. There have also been cases of people being infected through the use of surgical instruments.

It is understood that a 50 year old woman died from vCJD within the past few weeks after she received a blood transfusion in 2002 -- 4 years after leucodepletion was introduced.

Professor Collinge told Channel 4 News said that the blood test was "extremely good news". "In principle, it may allow us to find how many people in the population are infected so we can target risk management strategies and ensure the safety of our blood supply," he said. "It could also enable us to make an earlier diagnosis and as treatments become available it is going to be desperately important to get to patients early before there is extensive damage to the brain."

Frank Dobson, who was the health secretary who introduced leucodepletion, urged the government to provide any necessary future funding. "Up to now we have been flying blind, applying the precautionary principle. We now need to have extensive trials because we do not know who is carrying it and who is donating blood," he said.

But apart from the government backing needed if they are able to go to the next phase and start testing UK blood samples, professor Collinge said they would also need a commercial company to step in and take over because his laboratory is simply not capable of dealing with such large scale samples.

[byline: Victoria Macdonald]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[5] Turkey: 1st probable vCJD case
Date: Sat 24 Dec 2011
Source: Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders Extra [edited]
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3265806


[ref: Adapınar DO et al: The first report of a patient with probable variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Turkey. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2011; 1(1): 429-32]
-------------------------------------------------------
[Interested readers should access the original paper via the source URL to view the full text, the figures, and the references cited. - Mod.CP]

Abstract
--------
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) was first reported in the UK in 1996. Here, we report the 1st Turkish case of vCJD. A 47 year old man, who has never lived outside of Turkey and had had no transfusion, was admitted to the University Hospital with speech disorder, cognitive decline, and ataxia following depression, irritability, and personality change. The immunoassay of the 14-3-3 protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was negative. [The presence of 14-3-3 protein in CSF has been shown to be highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. - Mod.CP]. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed high-signal lesions involving the bilateral caudate and lentiform nucleus on T2- and diffusion-weighted imaging. The patient developed akinetic mutism 10 months after disease onset. The clinical presentation and neuroimaging findings were compatible with the vCJD cases reported since 1996 and met the World Health Organization's case definition for probable vCJD.

Introduction
------------
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), which is characterized by progressive dementia with a fatal and incurable course, is the most common human prion disease. There are 4 types of this disease: the sporadic (85 per cent), familial (10-15 per cent), iatrogenic (1 per cent), and variant types [1]. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) was first reported in 1996 in the United Kingdom and has been causally linked to the consumption of cattle products contaminated with the bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) agent [2]. To date, more than 215 cases of vCJD have been identified worldwide, including in the UK, France, Ireland, Italy, the USA, Canada, Saudi Arabia, Japan, The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Taiwan. In the present paper, we report the clinical and radiological data of the 1st Turkish case of vCJD.

Case report
-----------
A 47 year old man, who was previously healthy and had no history of psychiatric or neurological disorders before the onset of this disease, presented with a 6 month history of progressive behavioural and personality changes, depression, and cognitive decline. His relatives reported that personality changes were his 1st symptoms. He had been a rigorous, disciplined, and frugal person, who was dependable at work and a valued member of his family; however, he became aggressive, extravagant, foul-mouthed, sexually disinhibited, and angry. His wife reported that the patient would have sudden outbursts of agitation, and 2 months later, these outbursts were followed by paranoid behaviours and possessiveness. Due to the psychiatric nature of his complaints, he was admitted to a psychiatry clinic, where he was diagnosed as having a manic disorder and was given atypical antipsychotic drugs. 3 months later, the patient exhibited gait changes, ataxia, and dysarthria, severe forgetfulness, difficulties in swallowing and eating, and incontinence. The patient developed involuntary movements in both of his feet, with dystonic aversion-inversion posturing and occasional erratic movements. He became dependent and apathetic and exhibited regressive behaviours. The patient also exhibited visual hallucinations, during which he reported seeing animals. Some of these complaints may have been side effects from his medication and, consequently, several of the patient's medications were stopped or changed.

As a result of the progressive deterioration of the patient's general status, his relatives transferred him to the Psychiatry Department of our University Hospital. After the neurological examination conducted at the Psychiatry Clinic, he was diagnosed as having rapid progressive dementia with early onset and was hospitalized at the Neurology Clinic. As reported in the patient's medical history, he had never been exposed to cadaveric pituitary hormones, had never undergone a neurosurgical procedure, organ or tissue grafts, or a blood transfusion, and had never travelled to the UK or to any country with reported incidences of BSE.

The neurological examination revealed that the patient was disorientated in place and time. In addition, he was mute. Nystagmus and conjugate gaze dysfunction were present, as were cerebellar ataxia, dysmetria, and dysdiadochokinesia. The patient's tone was slightly increased in his lower limbs, and his plantar responses were extensor.

The level of protein in his cerebrospinal fluid was increased, and no 14-3-3 protein was detected. An electroencephalogram showed a generalized slowing of wave, which was more evident in the left hemisphere, but did not have any periodic complexes. He was referred to the Radiology Department for cerebral MRI. On T2-weighted images and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, hyperintense signal changes in the bilateral caudate nuclei (white arrows) and the lentiform nucleus (black arrows) were seen. In addition, hyperintensity in the bilateral thalamic region was less prominent than in the previously described areas. Cortical hyperintensity was noted on diffusion-weighted imaging.

Genotyping of the prion protein gene (PRNP) identified a P102L mutation and heterozygosity for methionine at codon 129. The patient did not want to undergo a brain biopsy, and we continued to follow his progress at his home. At the time this report was written, the patient was alive, mute, and on bed rest.

Discussion
----------
The patient described in the present report was the 1st probable case of vCJD in Turkey. The clinical features of this patient are consistent with the vCJD cases that have been identified in the UK and France, including psychiatric manifestations at the disease onset, a delayed occurrence of neurological signs, ataxia, and dementia [3]. In addition to the pulvinar sign that was present on the MRI and EEG, the patient fulfilled the WHO case definition for probable vCJD, the specificity of which is 100 per cent [4]. Of note, a tonsil biopsy is not necessary if the clinical features and the MRI findings are compatible with vCJD, as the pulvinar sign is highly characteristic [5].

Sequencing analysis revealed that the patient had 2 different nucleotide changes in the coding region of the PRNP gene. The 1st one is the M129V polymorphism, and our patient was heterozygous for this alteration. Interestingly, all the patients who have undergone genotyping up to now have been homozygous for methionine at codon 129. This polymorphism is associated with susceptibility to prion diseases [6]. The 2nd one is the P102L mutation, which was first identified in affected members of 2 unrelated families with Gerstmann-Straussler disease. P102L is one of the most common PRNP mutations and also related to CJD.

This case highlights the difficulties in achieving an early diagnosis of vCJD. At the initial presentation, a variety of diagnoses were proposed, but vCJD was not considered in this patient. Instead, he was diagnosed as having an affective disorder at the psychiatry clinic. The delayed neurological signs in this patient pointed to the possibility of progressive dementia, which is not surprising given the frequency of psychiatric features that are observed by primary care physicians. These clinical features are often misleading. Almost half of the cases of vCJD were reviewed by a psychiatrist prior to the patients' neurological referral [7]. A neurological etiology was usually suspected promptly after the patients developed objective neurological features, which resulted in a neurological referral in all of the cases. The single most important determinant of early diagnosis was the presence of objective neurological features. For this reason, all physicians must be careful when diagnosing rapidly progressing dementia that begins at a young age.

--
communicated by:
Terry S Singeltary Sr
<flounder9@verizon.net>

[The results presented in this report, if confirmed, indicate that patients with vCJD are still being detected by the medical community. The 1st presumptive Turkish case of vCJD has made its appearance 15 years after the 1st case in the United Kingdom. The source of this infection of a patient who had no contact with the UK or any of the other countries previously reporting vCJD, remains to be established. - Mod.CP]

******
[6] Prions in spleen
Date: Thu 26 Jan 2012
Source: Nature News [edited]
http://www.nature.com/news/prion-diseases-hide-out-in-the-spleen-1.9904


[ref: Marchant J: Prion diseases hide out in the spleen. Nature News doi:10.1038/nature.2012.9904]
-------------------------------------------------------
Prion diseases such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) are able to jump species much more easily than previously thought. A study published in Science today [26 Jan 2012] shows that in mice, prions introduced from other species can replicate in the spleen without necessarily affecting the brain. The study reinforces the concern that thousands of people in the United Kingdom might be silent carriers of prion infection, potentially able to pass a lethal form of the disease to others through surgery or blood transfusions.

Prions are infectious pathogens, primarily composed of the misfolded form of a protein called PrP. Normal PrP molecules that are converted into the misshapen type then aggregate in the brain to form hard, insoluble clumps -- with fatal consequences. Previous studies have judged the ease of cross-species transmission by looking for clinical symptoms as well as the presence of prions in infected animals' brains. Results from these studies suggested that in many cases there is an effective 'species barrier', with most inoculated animals seemingly free of prions at the end of their lives.

But prions don't just replicate in the brain -- they also affect lymphoid tissue, such as the spleen, tonsils, and appendix. So Vincent Beringue, a prion researcher at the French National Institute for Agricultural Research in Jouy-en-Josas, France, and his colleagues used mice that had been genetically engineered to express either the sheep or human version of PrP to look beyond the brain. The researchers injected prions from elk, hamsters, and cattle into the brains of the engineered mice -- all species barriers that are supposedly very hard to cross -- then looked for prions in the spleens and brains of the mice at regular intervals after exposure. As expected, few of the mice had detectable prions in their brains. When those expressing human PrP were inoculated with the BSE prion, only 3 out of 43 had detectable prions in their brains at the end of their lives. But in lymphoid tissue it was a different story, with 26 of 41 spleens testing positive for prions, even though the mice showed no clinical symptoms of BSE.

The research shows that prions jump species into lymphoid tissue much more easily than into brain tissue, says Beringue. "If you extrapolate that to the human situation, you can imagine that there are more people infected subclinically in lymphoid tissues such as the spleen, who may never develop the disease." That's a concern because these carriers could infect others, for example by blood transfusion, organ donation, or contaminated surgical instruments. Once passed human to human, the infection could in theory then affect the brain and cause lethal vCJD, says John Collinge, director of the Medical Research Council Prion Unit at University College London, who wrote an analysis to accompany the Beringue paper. "The main adaptation -- that the incoming BSE proteins have triggered the formation of human prions - has occurred," he says.

An epidemic of BSE among cows, dubbed 'mad cow disease', in Britain in the 1980s, led to stringent controls on meat production and the use of surgical and dental instruments. Human cases of the disease, vCJD, were first seen in the mid-1990s. That sparked fears of a devastating human epidemic, but only around 200 people have died from the disease since then, and cases have been tailing off. But 2 recent surveys of tissue samples from removed appendixes suggest that as many as in 4000 people in the United Kingdom could be carriers.

Beringue's findings could help to explain these results, says Collinge. "These estimates suggest there may be 15 to 20 000 people in the United Kingdom incubating the disease," he says. "Maybe they predominantly have an infection restricted to the lymphoreticular system." Collinge warns that "all efforts should be made" to assess the prevalence of prion infection in the United Kingdom by analysing surgical and autopsy tissues, and to investigate whether blood tests for vCJD can detect the infection in silent carriers (see part [4] above). "Maybe they will never develop the disease themselves," he says. "But it's precisely those people who present a risk to others."

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[While interesting, these findings are not new. The spleen cleans the blood of old and damaged blood cells and prions which are abnormal proteins may be filtered out in the spleen. - Mod.TG]

******
[7] Neurotoxic monomer
Date: Tue 14 Feb 2012
Source: Drug Discovery & Development [edited]
http://www.dddmag.com/news-New-Disease-10x-Deadlier-Than-Mad-Cow-21412.aspx


New disease 10x deadlier than "mad cow"
---------------------------------------
Scientists from the Florida campus of The Scripps Research Institute have identified a single prion protein that causes neuronal death similar to that seen in "mad cow" [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] disease, but is at least 10 times more lethal than larger prion species.

This toxic single molecule or "monomer" challenges the prevailing concept that neuronal damage is linked to the toxicity of prion protein aggregates called "oligomers." The study was published this week in an advance, online edition of the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. [The abstract of this publication is reproduced below. - Mod.CP]

"By identifying a single molecule as the most toxic species of prion proteins, we've opened a new chapter in understanding how prion-induced neurodegeneration occurs," said Scripps Florida professor Corinne Lasmezas, who led the new study. "We didn't think we would find neuronal death from this toxic monomer so close to what normally happens in the disease state. Now we have a powerful tool to explore the mechanisms of neurodegeneration."

In the study, the newly identified toxic form of abnormal prion protein, known as TPrP, caused several forms of neuronal damage ranging from apoptosis (programmed cell death) to autophagy, the self-eating of cellular components, as well as molecular signatures remarkably similar to that observed in the brains of prion-infected animals. The study found the most toxic form of prion protein was a specific structure known as alpha-helical.

In addition to the insights it offers into prion diseases such as "mad cow" and a rare human form Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the study opens the possibility that similar neurotoxic proteins might be involved in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson diseases.

In prion disease, infectious prions (short for proteinaceous infectious particles), thought to be composed solely of protein, have the ability to reproduce, despite the fact that they lack DNA and RNA. Mammalian cells normally produce what is known as cellular prion protein or PrP; during infection with a prion disease, the abnormal or misfolded protein converts the normal host prion protein into its disease form.

Lasmezas explains that prion diseases are similar to Alzheimer's and other protein misfolding diseases in that they are caused by the toxicity of a misfolded host protein. Recent work, as reported in The New York Times, also found that diseases such as Alzheimer's resemble prion diseases by spreading from cell to cell.

The new study adds another twist. "Until now, it was thought that oligomers of proteins are toxic in all these diseases," Lasmezas said. "Since we found for the 1st time that an abnormally folded monomer is highly toxic, it opens up the possibility that this might be true also for some other protein misfolding diseases as well."

[The following is the abstract from the PNAS article referred to in the preceding report. - Mod.CP]

Zhou M, Ottenberg G, Sferrazza GF, Ida Lasmezas C: Highly neurotoxic monomeric alpha-helical prion protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012 Feb 7. [Epub ahead of print], doi:10.1073/pnas.1118090109; available at http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2012/02/07/1118090109).

Abstract
--------
"Prion diseases are infectious and belong to the group of protein misfolding neurodegenerative diseases. In these diseases, neuronal dysfunction and death are caused by the neuronal toxicity of a particular misfolded form of their cognate protein. The ability to specifically target the toxic protein conformer or the neuronal death pathway would provide powerful therapeutic approaches to these diseases. The neurotoxic forms of the prion protein (PrP) have yet to be defined but there is evidence suggesting that at least some of them differ from infectious PrP (PrPSc). Herein, without making an assumption about size or conformation, we searched for toxic forms of recombinant PrP after dilution refolding, size fractionation, and systematic biological testing of all fractions. We found that the PrP species most neurotoxic in vitro and in vivo (toxic PrP, TPrP) is a monomeric, highly alpha-helical form of PrP. TPrP caused autophagy, apoptosis, and a molecular signature remarkably similar to that observed in the brains of prion-infected animals. Interestingly, highly alpha-helical intermediates have been described for other amyloidogenic proteins but their biological significance remains to be established. We provide unique experimental evidence that a monomeric alpha-helical form of an amyloidogenic protein represents a cytotoxic species. Although toxic PrP has yet to be purified from prion-infected brains, TPrP might be the equivalent of one highly neurotoxic PrP species generated during prion replication. Because TPrP is a misfolded, highly neurotoxic form of PrP reproducing several features of prion-induced neuronal death, it constitutes a useful model to study PrP-induced neurodegenerative mechanisms."

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[By identifying a single molecule as the most toxic species of prion proteins, a new advance has been made in the understanding of how prion-induced neurodegeneration occurs. Professor Corinne Lasmezas and colleagues commented that they had not expected to find death from this toxic monomer so close to what normally happens in the disease state. "Now we have a powerful tool to explore the mechanisms of neurodegeneration." - Mod.CP]

[

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1lNY, http://healthmap.org/r/1Cfs, http://healthmap.org/r/1hiS, http://healthmap.org/r/1oxc, http://healthmap.org/r/1yvG.]
See Also
Prion disease update 2012 (01) 20120104.0027
2011
---
Prion disease update 2011 (11) 20111207.3543
Prion disease update 2011 (10) 20111107.3317
Prion disease update 2011 (09) 20111003.2983
Prion disease update 2011 (08) 20110905.2710
Prion disease update 2011 (07) 20110810.2423
Prion disease update 2011 (06) 20110607.1736
Prion disease update 2011 (05) 20110505.1393
Prion disease update 2011 (04) 20110406.1066
Prion disease update 2011 (03) 20110309.0764
Prion disease update 2011 (02) 20110211.0473
Prion disease update 2011 (01): correction 20110112.0140
Prion disease update 2011 (01) 20110110.0119
2010
---
Prion disease update 2010 (11) 20101206.4364
Prion disease update 2010 (10) 20101105.4008
Prion disease update 2010 (09) 20101006.3622
Prion disease update 2010 (08) 20100911.3285
Prion disease update 2010 (07) 20100809.2720
Prion disease update 2010 (06) 20100706.2248
Prion disease update 2010 (05) 20100507.1488
Prion disease update 2010 (04) 20100405.1091
Prion disease update 2010 (03) 20100304.0709
Prion disease update 2010 (02) 20100205.0386
Prion disease update 2010 20100107.0076
.................................................sb/cp/mj/sh
</body>
