<header id=051204>
Published Date: 2011-04-24 11:31:38 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Avian influenza (41): 6 endemic countries, FAO
Archive Number: 20110424.1286
</header>
<body id=051204>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (41): 6 ENDEMIC COUNTRIES, FAO
**********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 21 Apr 2011
Source: FAO Media Centre - News Release [edited]
http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/66118/icode/


Eliminating the highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus from
poultry in the 6 countries where it remains endemic will take 10 or
more years, according to a new report from the Food and Agriculture
Organization [FAO] of the United Nations.

The report makes specific recommendations for each country regarding
measures that should be taken over the next 5 years to move them
towards virus elimination, and calls for a sustained commitment to
eradication efforts both by governments where the disease remains
endemic and by international donors.

At its peak in 2006, the H5N1 strain of highly pathogenic avian
influenza (H5N1 HPAI) was reported in 60 countries. Today, most have
managed to stamp it out, but the virus remains firmly entrenched in
Bangladesh, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam due to a
combination of 3 factors, according to the report.

The 1st factor relates to the structure of their national poultry
sectors. Endemically infected countries usually feature complex
production and market chains, with poultry reared and sold under
conditions that afford little protection from influenza viruses and
weak producer and service provider associations for supporting
farmers.

The 2nd factor is the quality of public and private veterinary and
animal production services, which are not always able to detect and
respond to infections or identify and correct underlying structural
problems in production and marketing systems.

The final [3rd] factor relates to the level of commitment to dealing
vigorously with H5N1. "The fear of H5N1 does not necessarily translate
into concrete plans for virus control and elimination," the report
notes.

Country-specific recommendations
--------------------------------
"Approaches to Controlling, Preventing and Eliminating H5N1 HPAI in
Endemic Countries" closes with detailed sets of recommendations
targeted to each country where H5N1 HPAI remains endemic.

They contain a mix of measures aimed at outbreak control and
response, gathering and analysing information and disease prevention
and risk reduction.

"The recommendations, which are based on lessons learned over the
last 7 years, are tailored to account for local differences in the
poultry sector of each country, the stage of development of the
country's H5N1 HPAI programme, and national socio-political
characteristics," said FAO chief veterinary officer Juan Lubroth.

"Each activity has clear objectives to enable measurement of progress
and to ensure that countries remain focused on the goal of virus
elimination. And it should also be noted that all the activities
proposed develop capacity for handling other emerging and re-emerging
diseases," he added.

The FAO/OIE Global Strategy on H5N1
-----------------------------------
A Global Strategy for Prevention and Control of H5N1 HPAI developed
by FAO and the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) cautions
that elimination of infection from countries where the H5N1 virus is
endemic will require consistent engagement and support and advocates a
medium- to long-term approach rather than just an emergency response.

This approach should include:

- continued building of capacities in key institutions, including
better functioning veterinary services with the necessary powers to
implement essential control measures and regulations;
- sustainable adjustments to the poultry sector to reduce the risks
of disease and infection in settings where commercial poultry
production and marketing practices carry high risks of HPAI;
- effective engagement of private-sector stakeholders (including
industrial poultry producers) in risk reduction efforts;
- sustained political commitment;
- the application of appropriate interim control measures, including
vaccination, to contain infection.

The strategy also stresses that all points in the production and
marketing chain should be examined to assess areas of risk and that
special attention must be paid to alleviating the impact of control
measures on vulnerable human populations.

FAO's HPAI Global Programme
---------------------------
Over the past 7 years, FAO's collaborative HPAI Global Programme has
contributed significantly to limiting the impact of the disease,
establishing stronger national systems, and strengthening regional
coordination for disease preparedness, prevention, and control.

The programme has been implemented through 170 projects, actively
involving more than 130 countries that have benefited in terms of
inputs for direct disease control, laboratory and farm detection
systems, capacity building, vaccines, vaccination strategies and
prevention measures that have kept the disease out.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The full, 97 page document, available at
http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2150e/i2150e.pdf, was initiated in
April 2010 by FAO's regional Emergency Centre for Transboundary Animal
Diseases team based in the Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
(ECTAD-RAP) in Bangkok; its principal writer was FAO consultant Les
Sims. The paper includes the following chapters:

1. Executive summary
2. Introduction
3. Current H5N1 HPAI status:
- Viet Nam,
- Bangladesh and West Bengal (India) - (Indo-Gangetic Plain centred
on and around the Ganges Delta)
- People's Republic of China
- Indonesia
- Egypt
4. Viruses by Clade
5. Genotypes
6. Knowledge generated, lessons learned during the past 5 years
7. Constraints to virus control, prevention and elimination
8. Realistic goals for the next 5 years 31
9. Innovative approaches to meeting goals 33
10. References
Annex 1: Country briefs (on each of the 6 endemic countries)
Annex 2: Possible milestones for Viet Nam 2010-2016

For subscribers' convenience, we copy herewith the concise
descriptions on the current HPAI H5N1 status in the 5 endemic
territories (6 countries, with Bangladesh and Bengal-India covered
together), as well as the chapter on vaccination.

1.Viet Nam
----------
Viet Nam 1st reported H5N1 HPAI in 2004, but by then the disease was
already widespread. The temporal pattern of reported outbreaks of
disease is provided in Figure 1 and shows a marked reduction in
reported cases of disease since the initial peak in 2004. So far in
2010, there have been no major changes in the number of human and
avian cases or of provinces reporting disease when compared with
previous years.

2. Bangladesh And West Bengal (India) -- (Indo-Gangetic Plain centred
on and around the Ganges Delta)
-----------------
The 1st reported cases of H5N1 HPAI in Bangladesh occurred in 2007.
Since then, new cases have been reported each year with a peak in
2008. A seasonal pattern is discernible with fewer cases in the
autumn. Outbreaks have been recorded in West Bengal each year since
2008 and have been addressed by wide area culling. Disease has also
been recorded in Nepal (2009 and 2010) and Bhutan (2010). All H5N1
HPAI viruses examined so far from Bangladesh and India fell within
Clade 2.2. One of the recent viruses from Nepal fell within Clade
2.3.2.

3. People's Republic Of China
-----------------------------
The People's Republic of China was the 1st country to detect H5N1
HPAI viruses in Asia (in 1996) and experienced the 1st reported
outbreaks of disease in 2004. Each year since then, there has been a
gradual reduction in the number of reported outbreaks of disease. The
winter of 2009-10 was noteworthy because no outbreaks of disease in
poultry were recorded, and there were no reported human cases (Table
1). Wild bird cases were reported in Qinghai in May 2009 and in Tibet
in May 2010. Only 2 wild bird cases were detected in Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region (SAR) since December 2009 through the intensive
dead bird monitoring programme, which is lower than in previous years.


It is important to analyse and understand why no cases in poultry or
humans were reported in the winter of 2009-10, because many of the
factors that should lead to persistence of H5N1 HPAI are still
present. These include the large population of ducks reared outdoors;
the presence of H5N1 HPAI in markets detected through the national
surveillance programme as recently as January 2010 (38 isolates from
markets from 13 provinces); and the large rural population with many
small flocks of poultry reared with few biosecurity measures in place.
Vaccination continues, and improvements have been made to market
management, but it is unlikely that the level of vaccination coverage
across the country or the market improvements were capable of
preventing all cases of infection and disease.

4. Indonesia
------------
Indonesia continues to report H5N1 HPAI outbreaks in poultry as it
has for the past 6 years. H5N1 HPAI Clade 2.1 is endemic on the
islands of Java, Sumatra and Sulawesi, with sporadic outbreaks
reported elsewhere. H5N1 HPAI incidence by village varies widely. Only
2 of Indonesia's 33 provinces have never reported any outbreaks of
H5N1 HPAI. The high level of monthly reports is partially explained by
the Participatory Disease Surveillance and Response (PDSR) programme
that enlists the participation of village poultry production systems
(mainly backyard) in reporting evidence of virus circulation in the
village (Figure 3). PDSR operates in 378 of 496 (76 per cent)
districts through 31 Local Disease Control Centres (LDCCs) in 29 (88
per cent) of 33 provinces in Java, Sumatra, Bali, Sulawesi, Kalimantan
and the Eastern Islands, including all known endemic areas. Larger and
less densely-populated provinces report HPAI outbreaks less often than
more densely populated provinces.

5. Egypt
--------
Egypt reported the 1st H5N1 HPAI outbreak in February 2006. Despite a
vigorous initial response to the disease, including the culling of
over 40 million birds, H5N1 HPAI has not been eliminated, and
outbreaks are regularly reported from different governorates. In
February 2010, 113 H5 HPAI outbreaks were observed in poultry
(chickens, ducks and turkeys) from 17 governorates. Of these, 93 (82
per cent) were reported from the household poultry sector. During
February 2010, Community Animal Health Outreach (CAHO) teams visited
88 villages in 10 governorates and detected 28 (25 per cent) of the
above-reported confirmed outbreaks. CAHO teams operate in high-risk
governorates and collect samples only from suspected cases.

Subscribers wishing to visit the tables, figures and references
included in the country summaries are referred to the original paper.

Vaccination against HPAI H5N1 has been subject to debates since the
onset of the panzootic. Two of the endemically infected countries
covered in the paper, namely India and Bangladesh, have opted for
official prohibition of vaccination. This decision, and the
inconsistent outcome of vaccination in the other 4 countries, are good
reason to copy herewith the following chapter.

Vaccination
-----------
Vaccination has been used in 4 of the endemically infected countries
and was introduced because H5N1 HPAI was causing high and unacceptable
economic losses and human infections. The following lessons have been
learned regarding vaccination against H5N1 HPAI:

- Used properly ["Properly formulated and stored vaccines produced
using good manufacturing practices (GMP) containing an appropriate
antigen and adjuvant capable of generating a strong immune response to
the circulating field strains and given at the recommended age"],
vaccination increases resistance of poultry to infection and markedly
reduces excretion of virus if an immune bird is subsequently
infected.

If a large scale vaccination programme is poorly designed (e.g.
inadequate dosage, improper age groups, etc.), it will be ineffective.
The mass vaccination campaign in Egypt provides a good example of the
limited effectiveness of large-scale vaccination campaigns when the
vaccine is not used appropriately.

- In places where vaccine programmes are being implemented, failure
to vaccinate or improper vaccination schedules are more common
explanations for disease breakdowns than vaccine product failures (in
which immune poultry develop disease or excrete large quantities of
virus). Cold chain failures have also been reported. All clinical
breakdowns in vaccinated poultry should be investigated to establish
whether the vaccine failure is due to the emergence of an antigenic
variant or the way the vaccine was handled and administered.

- Not all producers, especially duck farmers see the need to
vaccinate and, therefore, do not participate in vaccination
campaigns.

- Some countries such as India and Bangladesh perceive the benefits
in vaccination but have refrained from using it as part of their
control and prevention strategy for a range of valid reasons,
including practical issues related to the administration of the
vaccine and the nature of the poultry production sectors. Technical
and cost-effectiveness issues have also influenced the decision not to
use vaccination.

- Government-sponsored mass campaigns involving vaccination of
village level and smallholder poultry can be implemented if they are
planned properly and there is support for the campaign from all levels
including public and private. This approach has been attempted in
Indonesia. Mass campaigns are expensive and difficult to sustain,
although the People's Republic of China has been an exception,
maintaining a free vaccination service, delivering billions of doses
of vaccine for years on end. However, few countries are in a position
to support government-funded programmes of this magnitude.

- Mass vaccination campaigns as applied in places such as the
People's Republic of China and Viet Nam will never achieve sufficient
levels of population immunity across the whole country to prevent all
transmission of the virus but will protect individual flocks and
reduce the number of fully susceptible poultry.

- Mass campaigns have not fared well in other countries. They were
either stopped or not applied at all because the cost was too great
and the chance of achieving high-level coverage across broad areas was
low due to the rapid turnover of poultry. Other countries are looking
at ways to modify their vaccination programmes through applied
research.

- The high financial and human cost of sustaining a
government-sponsored mass vaccination programme has resulted in some
countries seeking ways to reduce their reliance on vaccination or even
stop blanket vaccination (exit strategies‚) and reverting to other
control measures.

- Some countries, such as Indonesia, have evidence to suggest that
emergency vaccination in the face of outbreaks spreads infection.
Others, like the People's Republic of China, have found it an
effective tool when coupled with wide area culling. If emergency
vaccination is used, extreme care needs to be taken by vaccinators to
avoid spreading virus, which in turn requires information on areas
where the virus is and sufficient knowledge of preventive medicine in
those conducting the campaign to ensure that vaccinators take
appropriate measures. In places where veterinary services are still
developing, this knowledge cannot be assumed.

- In several countries where vaccination has been used, antigenic
variant viruses have been detected, although it is not yet clear
whether the vaccine was responsible. In the People's Republic of
China, this problem has been addressed by introduction of new vaccine
antigens. In countries such as Egypt and Indonesia, despite access to
the necessary technology, it has proven difficult to make the
necessary changes to vaccines quickly. Systems need to be in place to
detect antigenic variants rapidly through antigenic testing and
experimental challenge of vaccinated poultry with suspected antigenic
variants, and to make adjustments to vaccines.

- Vaccination does not produce sterilizing immunity in all vaccinated
poultry, but experimentally, a high proportion of well-vaccinated
poultry with a strong immune response do not shed virus if
subsequently infected.

- Vaccination can complicate serological testing. Methods for
detection of infection in vaccinated flocks such as the use of
sentinels and "Differentiating between Infected and Vaccinated
Animals" (DIVA) testing, although widely promoted, are rarely used in
the endemically infected countries. The sensitivity and specificity of
DIVA tests for vaccines containing sub-unit antigens or containing a
heterosubtypic neuraminidase (NA) antigen have not been determined
under field conditions in Asia with H5N1 HPAI. Other methods may be
needed as countries practising vaccination move towards virus
elimination, especially if there is a transition period during which
vaccination is still allowed.

- Vaccination against HPAI in large commercial farms should be
regulated by the public sector regardless of the size of the farms
involved or whether the farmers pay for the vaccine. Whenever
possible, other means of risk reduction should also be used including
enhanced farm biosecurity measures and management practices. Decision
trees developed for the introduction of vaccination for western
countries do not take into account the many constraints that have to
be faced in developing countries. The questions that were raised
before and during implementation of the vaccination campaign in Viet
Nam are well described in a study entitled APEC AI Tool Kit Case Study
on Vaccination in Viet Nam and may be of value to other endemically
infected countries considering vaccination.

The strengths, weaknesses and likely effects of all control and
prevention measures, including vaccination, should be assessed by
endemically infected countries, taking into account local factors
likely to affect implementation. If, for example, there is rapid
turnover of village poultry, then a state-sponsored mass vaccination
campaign involving these birds is likely to be expensive and unlikely
to be very effective due to the low level of population immunity that
would be achieved.

This is a timely and useful paper for those concerned with the animal
health aspects of AI. - Mod.AS]
See Also
Avian influenza (40): Bangladesh (DA) 20110420.1232
2010
---
Avian influenza (52): world update, FAO 20101118.4180
2009
---
Avian influenza (50): Egypt, China, Indonesia, FAO update 20090902.3089
Avian influenza (37): world update, FAO 20090521.1898
2008
---
Avian influenza (88): Viet Nam, vaccination 20080720.2202
2007
---
Avian influenza (165): Europe (FAO), Viet Nam 20071027.3491
2006
---
Avian influenza (169) - OIE/FAO(OFFLU), Indonesia 20060802.2140
2005
---
Avian influenza - Eastern Asia (64): FAO/OIE/WHO 20050706.1907
.................................................dh/arn/msp/sh
</body>
