<header id=056682>
Published Date: 2019-06-13 06:46:51 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed deaths - Dominican Republic (02): travelers, resort, poisoning susp
Archive Number: 20190613.6515494
</header>
<body id=056682>
UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS - DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (02): TRAVELERS, RESORT, POISONING SUSPECTED
************************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 12 Jun 2019
Source: New York Times [edited]
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/12/travel/dominican-republic-deaths.html


More than two million Americans visit the Dominican Republic every year, making up about a third of the country's tourists. Six have died in the last year during their visits. Because of the seeming similarities among their deaths, their family members have suggested that they are connected and have raised suspicions about the resorts where they died. Here's what we know, and don't know, about the circumstances.

Who has died, and how?

Yvette Monique Sport, 51, died in June 2018 of a heart attack. Her sister, Felecia Nieves, has said that Ms. Sport had a drink from the minibar in her room at a Bahia Príncipe resort, one of a number on the island, then went to sleep and never woke up.

In July 2018, David Harrison, 45, died at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Punta Cana. Mr. Harrison died of a heart attack and The Washington Post reported that his death certificate also listed "pulmonary edema, an accumulation of fluid in the lungs that can cause respiratory failure, and atherosclerosis" as causes of death. He and his wife were in the Dominican Republic for their wedding anniversary with their son.

In April of this year, Robert Wallace became sick at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Punta Cana, where he was attending a wedding and died. The 67 year old's family said that he became ill after drinking scotch from the minibar in the hotel.

Miranda Schaup-Werner, 41, of Allentown, Pa., was celebrating her 10th wedding anniversary when she died at the Luxury Bahia Príncipe Bouganville, on May 25 of this year of a heart attack. She had been at the resort for less than 24 hours.

A few days later, Nathaniel Edward Holmes 63, and Cynthia Ann Day, 49, from Prince George's County, Md., were found dead in their room at the Grand Bahia Príncipe La Romana. The two had recently become engaged. An autopsy found that the couple had respiratory failure and pulmonary edema.

Are the hotels connected?

Four of the dead were staying at Bahia Príncipe resorts, which are part of a group of 14 hotels in the Dominican Republic that are popular among tourists because they are all-inclusive. The Luxury Bahia Príncipe Bouganville, where Ms. Schaup-Werner died, is less than a five-minute walk away from the Grand Bahia Príncipe La Romana, where Mr. Holmes and Ms. Day died. Both are near the town of San Pedro De Macoris. The Hard Rock is across the island from the other two hotels in Punta Cana. It is not known which Bahia Príncipe resort Ms. Sport was staying in.

What are the hotels saying?

In a statement on Friday, Bahia Principe said reports of the deaths had been inaccurate and that the hotel was committed to "collaborating completely with the authorities and hope for a prompt resolution of their inquiries and actions."

Hard Rock Hotels & Casinos said in a statement on Tuesday evening that it is waiting for official reports about the deaths and is, "Deeply saddened by these two unfortunate incidents, and we extend our sincerest sympathy to the families of Mr. Harrison and Mr. Wallace."

What are Dominican officials doing?

The Dominican Attorney General's office and the national police are investigating the deaths, but tourism officials have been downplaying them. The tourism minister, Francisco Javier García, said last week that in the last five years, more than 30 million tourists have visited the country, and that these deaths are "isolated incidents" and the island is safe for tourists.

"These are situations that can occur in any country, in any hotel in the world," he said. "It's regrettable but sometimes it happens."

The tourism ministry said last week that hotels had 60 days to install security cameras.

What are U.S. officials saying?

In a statement issued Tuesday evening, the U.S. State Department said that "Dominican authorities have asked for F.B.I. assistance for further toxicology analysis," and it could take up to a month to receive the results. A spokeswoman for the Centers for Disease Control said that the organization had not received a request for assistance from the Dominican Republic relating to these deaths.

Are there any theories as to what might be causing the deaths?

Tom Inglesby, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said in a phone interview that the symptoms that have been reported, like pulmonary edema, bleeding and vomiting blood, are "consistent with poisoning," perhaps accidental. But until toxicology reports are available, he said, it is difficult and too soon to definitively say what caused the visitors' deaths.

"It's rare for travelers to die of unknown causes like this, and to have a high number of them in a relatively short period of time is alarming, shocking, sad," Dr. Inglesby said. "It's something that investigators should be able to get to the bottom of."

The fact that toxicology reports have not been released or completed is "unconscionable and inexplicable," he said.

Have there been other incidents?

Two couples have come forward to say they fell ill while staying at one of the Bahia Príncipe resorts where tourists have died.

In January 2018, Doug Hand, 40, and his wife Susie Lauterborn, 38, were staying at the Grand Bahia Príncipe La Romana when, he said in a phone interview, they got sick with fevers, nausea, cold sweats, diarrhea and fatigue.

Mr. Hand said that he didn't drink alcohol on the trip, but he did notice a "moldy, mildewy smell like the A.C. or filter hadn't been cleaned."

When Mr. Hand told an employee in the hotel's lobby that his wife was sick, the employee gave him directions to a doctor, but seemed more focused on ensuring the couple attended a meeting about buying time shares, Mr. Hand said.

Kaylynn Knull, 29, and Tom Schwander, 33, are suing the resort chain for $1 million, their lawyer told The Times, because the Colorado-based couple became violently ill during their stay at the Grand Bahia Príncipe La Romana last summer. Ms. Knull got a persistent headache and was sweating and drooling profusely, the lawyer, David Columna, said. She also had blurry vision, nausea and diarrhea, she told CNN, and family doctors determined the couple had been exposed to organophosphates, a class of insecticides.

"The hotel did nothing," said Mr. Columna, who is representing Ms. Knull and Mr. Schwander in the Dominican Republic. The couple, he said, "spent the night inhaling the chemical and they are still having side effects of the intoxication and the hotel hasn't given us any idea of what happened."

[Byline: Elisabeth Malkin, Tariro Mzezewa]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Mon 10 Jun 2019
Source: Washington Post [edited]
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/06/10/dominican-republic-american-tourist-death-mystery/?utm_term=.091b20281131


Another American died in the Dominican Republic. Officials insist the country is safe.

Another American has died at a Dominican resort, the 4th in the last year, raising alarm among US tourists and the island-tourism industry relying heavily on them.

The increasing number of mysterious deaths and reported sudden illness at resorts in the Dominican Republic have drawn unsettling attention to the nation of 10 million, prompting government officials there and the US ambassador to reassure travelers the country is safe. More Americans have visited the tropical island nation -- with its pearl-white coastline and value travel packages to all-inclusive resorts -- in recent years than France, US Embassy officials said.

In the most recent reported incident, the State Department confirmed an American tourist died but did not identify the person. Fox News Channel, citing a relative, identified the tourist as victim RBW. The California man died in April [2019] after becoming ill at a Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Punta Cana. An obituary for the 67-year-old said he "passed unexpectedly while vacationing in the Dominican Republic" on 14 Apr 2019. He was in the country to attend a wedding, according to the news network when he nearly immediately fell sick after going to his resort and died.

MSW, 41, of Allentown, Pennsylvania, was celebrating her 10th wedding anniversary when she died 25 May 2019 within 24 hours of arriving at her hotel room. NEH (some news agencies report EHN), 63, and CAD, 49, both of Prince George's County in Maryland, had just become engaged before their Dominican trip. They were found dead in their room on 30 May 2019.

Amid the turmoil stirred by the tourist deaths, Red Sox legend "Big Papi" also known as DO was shot in the back late [Sun 9 Jun 2019] during an ambush at an outdoor restaurant and bar patio in the Dominican capital city. The former major league slugger was flown [Mon 10 Jun 2019] in stable condition to Boston for further treatment and local police say they have arrested 1 of 2 alleged attackers.

The spate of bad news from the Caribbean country has some American tourists reflecting afresh on their own tragic experiences.

DM of Brandywine, Maryland, has traveled many times to the same hotel where RBW reportedly died. Her husband, DH, loved the resort and went as often as time permitted. The 45-year-old died there in July 2018 after unexpectedly falling ill. But at the time, his wife accepted the autopsy results showing he had died of a heart attack.

DM had planned to honor her husband by revisiting the resort in mid-May 2019 with her son. But she canceled after news broke of the death of the couple from her home county of Prince George's. "That was his paradise," said DM, who works in a law office in suburban Washington. "We had booked the reservation. We enjoyed going there so much. But that was before, when I thought his death was just a fluke."

In 3 of the 4 death cases, the Dominican National Police released autopsy results citing similar causes of death for MSW, NEH, and CAD. Dominican police and the attorney general's office declined to comment until toxicology reports, which could take a month to complete, are released publicly. The FBI is assisting with those tests, according to the State Department.

The Hard Rock resort could not be reached to comment early [Mon 10 Jun 2019]. A relative of RBW's declined to comment to The Washington Post.

Local officials have offered reassurances as the disturbing news has gone global and imperiled a crucial sector of their economy.

Dominican officials have insisted the island is safe, noting more than 2 million Americans visit its beaches each year, accounting for about a 1/3 of the tourist population each year, according to the country's tourism ministry. Attorney general Jean Alain Rodriguez told local journalists after the attack on DO the Dominican Republic is "secure but definitely has many challenges," according to a video published on the Listin Diario news site.

Francisco Javier Garcia, the country's minister of tourism, suggested the deaths may simply be a coincidence. "Sometimes in life there can be a law of sequences," he told reporters at a news conference [Thu 6 Jun 2019]. "Sometimes, nothing may happen to you in a year. But in another week, 3 things might happen to you."

The deaths appear isolated, according to Dominican National Police, and no link has been made between them. But the similarities, proximity and frequency of death among relatively healthy American tourists troubles DM.

MSW fell ill shortly after consuming a drink from the hotel minibar at the Luxury Bahia Principe Bouganville in La Romana, a beach town about 70 miles [about 113 km] west of Punta Cana. She was taking pictures on the room balcony and preparing for dinner when she became ill.

In a statement shared [Wed5 Jun 2019], the hotel said MSW had died of a heart attack, adding her husband confirmed she had "a history of heart conditions." The Dominican's attorney general's office released more details describing the woman's lungs filling up with liquid and her heart failing as a result.

Five days later, the bodies of CAD and NEH were found in their hotel room at the nearby Grand Bahia Principe La Romana on 30 May 2019. The couple became sick the night before, complaining of diarrhea, vomiting, and sweating, said Steven Bullock, the families' attorney. Bullock said they asked to see the hotel doctor, but upon realizing they would be charged hundreds of dollars for the service, a relative obtained medication locally. The next morning, they were dead.

Investigators found blood pressure medication and several prescription pill bottles, including one containing 5 mg doses of oxycodone, a painkiller, Galanpertin, and Loxofen. Bullock did not know which medications were bought locally. A medical examiner in La Romana confirmed that some of the prescription pills came from a local pharmacy.

The 3 visitors all had hemorrhaging, pulmonary edema, and enlarged hearts, according to autopsy results released [Thu 6 Jun 2019] by the government.

"This is just describing a natural disease. Without a full report, it's hard to know," said Dr Grace Dukes of the College of American Pathologist's Forensic Pathology Committee. "It's not a clear picture of the cause of death. Just snapshots. If these are natural deaths, you would need negative toxicology results to prove that."

Both establishments are owned by the same company, Bahia Principe Hotels & Resorts. In a statement, hotel officials said their employees followed all appropriate security protocols and "misinformation" has damaged the "image and reputation" of one of the Dominican Republic's most prestigious hoteliers. The brand owns 14 properties on the island and has the greatest number of "hotel beds in the country," hosting about 700,000 guests a year, the statement said.

The hotel company did not respond to questions about cancellations or a falling number of reservations due to the deaths.

But a Colorado couple who stayed at the same resort a year ago told their local news station that they smelled something strange after entering their room at the La Romana hotel. Before long, KK and TS were drooling, experiencing intestinal pain, and woke up sweating. They went home and were told by a local doctor that they had been poisoned by insecticides containing "organophosphates," they said in the local TV interview.

Attempts by The Post to reach the couple have not been successful.

Dr Barbarajean Magnani, a Tufts Medical Center pathologist who chairs the toxicology committee for College of American Pathologists, said the symptoms described by the couple appear to be consistent with poisoning. Organophosphates -- nerve agents and the chemical sarin are derivatives of the substance -- contain an enzyme that breaks down a critical neurotransmitter in the brain that is necessary for normal functioning.

Poisoned patients complain of diarrhea, excessive secretions such as urine and tears, and respiratory arrest. Specialized laboratories can test for the specific chemical in blood and tissue samples. The toxic insecticide ingredient can be inhaled, absorbed through the skin or be transmitted from contaminated hands into water and food products. Organophosphates, Magnani said, have a particularly strong odor similar to garlic.

But Magnani said investigators would need to know more about pre-death symptoms before suspecting poison.

"There is a wide spectrum of things that could have happened and underlying medical issues could have contributed to the death," she said. "You must wait for the toxicology report to put the whole picture together."

DM is questioning whether her husband's death was something more. In addition to a heart attack, a copy of DH's death certificate obtained by The Post listed pulmonary edema, an accumulation of fluid in the lungs that can cause respiratory failure, and atherosclerosis as causes of death.

DH, she said, was "relatively healthy" other than having high blood pressure, which he regulated with medicine. The couple had "no issues" until the afternoon of 13 Jul 2018, when NEH left his wife and 12-year-old son at the pool after telling them he didn't feel well. He returned to their room to take a nap. When DH woke up later in the evening, he seemed to be feeling better, but DM said she immediately noticed something wasn't right.

The 45-year-old woke up in the middle of that night drenched in sweat and exuding a pungent odor. "He had a very potent strange smell," she said. "It was very strong."

Then, about 5:20 the next morning, McCoy said, she woke up to DH "struggling to get out of bed. He couldn't talk," she said. "He was mumbling. ... He was sweating profusely."

DM said she immediately called for help, but by the time the resort's doctor arrived at the room about 20 minutes later, DH appeared to be dead. According to official documents obtained by The Post, it was recorded at 6:48 a.m. that he "had no vital signs, he was cold." DH's body was flown back to the United States later in the month and cremated, DM said.

DH's death certificate, which was issued by the US government, classified the death as "natural, nonviolent."

"I accepted it," DM told The Post. "Then, when all these people started passing, I stopped and thought to myself, 'How can all these people have the same cause of death as DH? What is missing? What am I missing here?' ... I am a fighter and I accepted his death for what they said it was. Now, I'm sorry I accepted it."

McCoy said she emailed the US Embassy in the Dominican Republic last week [week of 3 Jun 2019] to inquire about whether a toxicology report was done but has not heard back.

"I just want answers," she said, noting that she isn't seeking monetary compensation. "I think it's pointless at this point to even look into a lawsuit. It's not going to bring him home."

This story has been updated with a more accurate title for Dr Barbarajean Magnani, a pathologist at Tufts Medical Center and a professor at the Tufts University School of Medicine.

[Byline: Arelis R Hernandez , Allyson Chiu, Deanna Paul]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Tue 11 Jun 2019
Source: Business Insider [edited]
https://www.businessinsider.my/dominica-republic-resort-chain-has-history-of-illness-2019-6/


The Dominican Republic resort where tourists have been dying has a long history of vacationers contracting serious illnesses

A hotel chain in the Dominican Republic has been the site of 3 American tourists' deaths in recent months.

But the chain has a long history of tourist troubles.

In 2009, the Grand Bahia Principe chain was the center of a series of lawsuits relating to nearly 1000 British tourists getting sick.

Three [or 4, or maybe more] American tourists have died in recent months while staying at the same hotel chain in the Dominican Republic. But their deaths speak to a long history of troubles at Dominican Republic resorts and hotels.

In late May [2019], NEH and CAD of Maryland were found dead inside their room at the Bahia Principe hotel at the resort Playa Nueva Romana, 5 days after MSW of Pennsylvania collapsed and died at the Luxury Bahia Principe Bouganville in San Pedro de Macoris.

Since then, others have come forward about falling ill at the resort chain, which has 14 hotels across the Dominican Republic, in addition to other properties in the Caribbean and Spain.

New York resident AW told the New York Daily News she became severely sick after drinking what she says was a bleach-filled soda in her minibar at the Luxury Bahia Principe Bouganville in October [2018]. The incident left her vomiting blood and with chemical burns in her mouth.

Coloradan KK told The Denver Channel she and her boyfriend TS got sick while staying at the Grand Bahia Principe La Romana in June 2018, alleging they were poisoned at the property. A doctor in the US later told the couple they were likely exposed to pesticides, and they are now suing the hotel.

A more detailed autopsy of the 3 victims released last week [week of 3 Jun 2019] by Dominican government officials found they all experienced similar symptoms before their deaths, including internal hemorrhaging, pulmonary edema, and enlarged hearts. Official toxicology reports have yet to be released, and the resort said in a statement "to date, there are no indications of any correlation between these unfortunate events."

"We disapprove of any speculation and conjecture on the possible causes of death and urge all to respect the families while the investigation is ongoing," the statement adds.

This isn't the 1st time people have fallen ill while staying at these hotels. These hotels have a long history of health problems.

For instance, in 2007, the Daily Mail reported British tourists were hospitalized while staying at the Bahia Principe hotel in Punta Cana. Law firm Irwin Mitchell told the publication at the time they have represented clients involving problems with the hotel "going back at least 10 years."

The firm represented nearly 1000 British travelers in a class action lawsuits against the UK travel company Thomas Cook and its subsidiary, My Travel; as well as the travel company First Choice. The tourists alleged they contracted _Shigella_ sp, _Giardia_ sp, _Salmonella_ sp, and _E. coli_ while staying at what had been sold to them as a luxury resort. According to the suit, 29 plaintiffs needed to be hospitalized following their visit.

According to Irwin Mitchell, the outbreak was so severe, one plane returning to the UK with tourists from the hotels needed to be quarantined at Gatwick Airport before guests were allowed off.

"It beggars [staggers] belief to think so many people can fall ill at one hotel without the issue being resolved and it's a shocking example of how not to treat your customers," Clive Garner, a lawyer with Irwin Mitchell, told the Daily Mail.

In 2009, the group was awarded GBP 5.5 million (USD 6.9 million)

[Business Insider] has reached out to Irwin Mitchell for comment.

In another example, Norwich Evening News, an England-based publication, reported in 2010 a local man became severely ill with salmonella and amoebic dysentery while on vacation at Gran Bahia Principe Hotel in Cayacoa. After discovering they were not the 1st tourists to get sick at the hotel, they filed a lawsuit against their travel agents, TUI UK, and successfully received compensation.

"I just had to take legal action because when you stay in a 4 or 5 star hotel, you don't expect to end up in hospital with food poisoning and my once in a lifetime experience will always be remembered for the wrong reasons," FM told the publication.

And in 2014, London resident MB won a GBP 20 000 [about USD 25 000] settlement from travel agency Thomas Cook after his 2009 trip to the Dominican Republic was ruined by illness. Bidwell and his wife stayed at the Bahia Principe Hotel in San Juan and he came down with a severe gastric illness.

"I regret ever staying at the hotel. It was a terrible experience for us and I am still suffering the consequences today as I am still experiencing ongoing symptoms," he said in a 2014 interview with Caribbean 360.

In a statement to [Business Insider], Bahia Principe Hotels & Resorts said, "we reiterate our firm commitment to collaborating completely with the authorities and hope for a prompt resolution of their inquiries and actions and will not be making any further statements that may interfere with them."

"The safety and comfort of our guests and staff stand at the core of our company values, and we work daily to ensure it," the statement added.

[Byline: Nicole Einbinder]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The more I read of all the similarities, it smacks more and more of organophosphate poisoning. Accidental? Perhaps, but the repetition of these deaths and such similar findings on autopsy are very suspicious. If this does turn out to be a poisoning then who is causing it?

Extreme sweating, pungent odors, and slurring words (numbness) does not sound normal. Nevertheless, I would want to rule out organophosphates (OP). I would like to know what they had to eat or drink; perhaps something harmful was slipped to them or some contaminated seafood was consumed? The signs described, coupled with pulmonary edema, makes an organophosphate poisoning high on my list of differentials.

The mnemonic used for the toxidrome or toxic syndrome in organophosphate (OP) toxicity or poisoning is SLUDGE, which stands for salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastric cramps, and emesis (vomiting) symptoms. However, several other clinical signs and symptoms may be present. - Mod.TG

HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Dominican Republic: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=6515494,24]
See Also
Undiagnosed deaths - Dominican Republic: travelers 20190609.6511612
.................................................ml/tg/ml/mj/ml
</body>
