<header id=020680>
Published Date: 2011-05-25 05:24:39 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (09): (CM)
Archive Number: 20110525.1588
</header>
<body id=020680>
UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS - THAILAND (09): (CHIANG MAI)
************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 24 May 2011
Source: Phuket Wan Tourism News [edited]
http://phuketwan.com/tourism/chiang-mai-deaths-riddle-update-discounts-big-killer-14153/


Investigations into a ''cluster'' of mysterious deaths of tourists in
Chiang Mai have so far produced no clear patterns, an official update
reveals.

The riddle of what killed [a 23-year-old female New Zealander] and 5
others remain, and inquiries are reported to be continuing.

The latest official account rejects any link involving a 7th victim
and makes the point that there is no sure connection between all 6
deaths.

''Despite the best efforts of Thai authorities and international
partners, a complete explanation for the cause of deaths may not be
found for all cases,'' the report says, noting that toxicology
investigations can take time.

Toxicologists from 7 countries or international organizations are
involved in continuing investigations, says the Department of Disease
Control in Thailand's Ministry of Public Health.

Interestingly, although the deaths of 2 young female tourists on Phi
Phi in 2009 are not part of this investigation, the Chiang Mai cases
update reports that the bug-killer chemical ''chlorpyrifos generally
emits a strong odor which was not noted by the 2 surviving women.''

However, [an American], one of the survivors of the incident on Phi
Phi that killed his fiancee and [a Norwegian woman] in adjoining rooms
at the Laleena Guesthouse 2 years ago, has always said he noted a
strong chemical smell when entering their room.

The chances of solving the mystery of the Phi Phi deaths is slim but
in the Chiang Mai cases, it appears an effort is at least being
mounted to explain 6 deaths and salvage some of the popular
destination's tourism reputation.

Here's what the latest official report says:

International toxicologists consulted in Chiang Mai tourist deaths -
update 3, 23 May 2011
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Thai public health authorities have enlisted the assistance of
international toxicology experts this month [May 2011] to determine
whether toxins or chemical agents might be involved in the deaths of 5
foreign tourists and a Thai guide and the associated illnesses of 3
other individuals in Chiang Mai earlier this year [2011].

The Department of Disease Control, Ministry of Public Health (MOPH)
and the Chiang Mai provincial authorities, enlisted the help of these
expert toxicologists as part of the on-going investigation into the
deaths that occurred between January and February this year [2011].
The toxicologists are from Australia, India, Sri Lanka, the United
Kingdom, the United States, the World Health Organisation (WHO), and
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC).

This consultation followed an earlier meeting of experts at the
Department of Disease Control held on 10 May 2011 with the Chiang Mai
provincial authorities to review information gathered over the past
few months. This meeting involved clinicians, epidemiologists,
laboratory specialists, pathologists, toxicologists, and police as
well as the WHO and the US CDC. Subsequently, representatives of
relevant consulates were briefed on the progress of the
investigation.

The toxicology experts have reviewed the available evidence and
discussed several possible causes involving toxins and chemical agents
as a cause of death. The toxicologists also discussed the suggestion
made by the New Zealand TV3 '60 Minutes' program that chlorpyrifos
(used as an insecticide) was responsible for the death of one woman
from New Zealand and the illness of her 2 traveling companions.

While a cause has not been clearly identified to date, experts
recognized that chlorpyrifos generally emits a strong odor which was
not noted by the 2 surviving women. They also noted that chlorpyrifos
is not well absorbed by the skin nor would it cause rapid illness or
death in a healthy adult unless it was ingested or inhaled in very
high quantities. Furthermore, the details of the clinical and
laboratory investigation do not support chlorpyrifos as a cause.

The toxicologists are also considering the possibility that other
chemical agents including those found in pest control products might
cause signs, symptoms and laboratory findings consistent with the
features seen. Experts are also currently working to identify the most
suitable laboratories to carry out specific tests for selected pest
control ingredients in the remaining samples.

Concurrently, environmental and toxicology assessment involving
experts and laboratories from the Ministry of Agriculture; the
Department of Health, MOPH; Ramathibodi Poison Center; the Faculty of
Agriculture, Chiang Mai University is underway at the hotel where 4
persons died.

The initial assessment of overnight room ventilation in April [2011]
found adequate air ventilation with normal levels of nitrogen dioxide
and sulfur dioxide; and no evidence of carbon monoxide accumulation. A
parallel investigation has also been undertaken by local police.

While Thai authorities and international partners are actively
pursuing the hypothesis that these 6 deaths might be linked to a
similar cause, the investigation so far reveals few common traits
except that:
- All occurred in Chiang Mai between 11 Jan and 19 Feb 2011;
- 6 of the 9 reported people affected lodged at one hotel (3 were at
2 different hotels);
- The 1st 6 people identified are young (aged 23-29) female non-Thai
nationals.

The people who died and fell ill are being examined in 3 groups based
on the hotels they stayed in, as follows:
1. One American woman (age 33) who died on 11 Jan 2011 and her
Canadian colleague (age 29) who fell ill;
2. One French woman (age 25) who died on 19 Jan 2011;
3. a) One Thai woman (age 47) who died on 3 Feb 2011
b) One New Zealand woman (age 23) who died 6 Feb 2011 and her 2
traveling companions (both age 23) who both fell ill;
c) A couple from the UK -- one man (78) and woman (74) who both died
on 19 Feb 2011.

Based on findings currently available, there is insufficient evidence
to link the illnesses and deaths among these 3 groups.

The American, Canadian, and French women had no activities in
connection with other hotels and other cases. The French woman also
began to fall ill few days before arrival in Chiang Mai.

There have been reports that a Canadian man who died in January
[2011] may have used the swimming pool of the hotel where the Thai
woman, the New Zealand women, and the UK couple stayed (hotel number 3
above).

However it has not been possible to confirm these reports or even to
establish the day when this visit was supposed to have occurred. In
addition, the available evidence from medical records and autopsy by
forensic experts do not currently support linkage with other deaths.
Therefore the death of this man has not been included in the cluster.

It was also initially believed on the basis of clinical findings that
myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) was a common factor in
a number of deaths. However, although it is clear that heart muscle
damage occurred in these cases, further investigation of clinical,
laboratory, and histopathology records, has only established clear
evidence of myocarditis in the case of the French woman.

It is partly this evidence that has resulted in the scope of the
investigation being widened to look for other causes of cardiac damage
(that can mimic the clinical appearance of myocarditis), including
toxins and chemical agents.

A final explanation of the most likely cause of the event(s),
including exact cause of illnesses and deaths, and any important
related factors, will be made based upon the synthesis of evidence
from clinical, epidemiologic, laboratory, environmental, and forensic
investigations.

It is important to highlight that a complex investigation such as
this, which also includes international laboratory analyses, takes
time. Any new toxicology results are also likely to take time if
specimens need to be shipped to specialist laboratories.

It is also possible that cases may not all be linked, and may instead
be due to different causes. Despite the best efforts of Thai
authorities and international partners, a complete explanation for the
cause of deaths may not be found for all cases.

The Thai Ministry of Public Health will provide information as it
becomes available to the families, the international community and the
media, and will provide regular updates on its Thai and English
websites (http://www.ddc.moph.go.th). Any persons who may have
specific medical or public heath concerns about this event are invited
to report them or make queries to <askcmevent@gmail.com>

--
Communicated by:
Denis Legion
<legion@q-net.net.au>

[There really is not much new information in this post. It could be
summed up as an international team is examining the deaths, and
determining if they are linked. The investigation will take time as
international labs are involved. Sadly, no cause or link may be found
with all the labs.

While this article does state that a number of the victims stayed at
the same hotel, I cannot recall if it said they were in different
rooms or the same room? - Mod.TG]
See Also
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (08): (CM) 20110524.1574
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (07): (CM) 20110512.1459
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (06): (CM) 20110423.1273
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (05): (CM) 20110420.1227
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (04): (CM) 20110325.0949
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (03): (CM) 20110322.0904
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand (02): (CM) 20110318.0866
Undiagnosed deaths - Thailand: (CM) RFI 20110312.0802
.................................................tg/mj/dk
</body>
