<header id=038482>
Published Date: 2022-10-08 21:58:23 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Brucellosis - Australia (03): (QL) sheep
Archive Number: 20221009.8706041
</header>
<body id=038482>
BRUCELLOSIS - AUSTRALIA (03): (QUEENSLAND) SHEEP
************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 1 Oct 2022
Source: ABC [edited]
https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2022-10-01/fears-studs-misleading-buyers-about-sheep-disease-brucellosis/101489494


Sheep breeders accused of misleading ram buyers during ovine brucellosis outbreak
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A devastating disease, causing abortions, infertility, and weak lambs is spreading in Queensland, and sheep producers fear some studs are misleading ram buyers about their disease-free status.

Graziers said the welfare of their flock as well as the future supply of wool and lamb had been put at risk by unregistered breeders falsely claiming to have accreditation proving their animals were not carrying ovine brucellosis (OB).

The bacterial infection, which does not affect humans, is found in the semen of rams and can lead to infertility for both rams and ewes, abortions in pregnant ewes, and lambs struggling to survive.

But many breeders lost faith in the accreditation scheme when false positive test results from a state government-run lab led to the unnecessary destruction of rams which were not infected in 2015.

Now, as rams sell for record-breaking prices and the industry rebuilds its numbers, the reluctance to test and register could threaten its recovery.

Stud standards questioned
-------------------------
Most of Queensland's studs take part in the voluntary Ovine Brucellosis Accreditation Scheme, which regularly tests flocks to maintain accreditation. But the recent outbreak had producers questioning if rams being sold as free of the infection were tested at all.

Will Roberts sits on the council of the Queensland Merino Stud Sheep Breeders Association and runs his merino stud from his Morven property, Victoria Downs.

He said the outbreak was a huge concern within the local sheepmeat and wool industries, which were still rebuilding after years of drought and wild dog predation.

"There are people out there who have set themselves up as studs but they're not following all the right protocols and, as a result, we get things like this popping up," Mr Roberts said.

"It's not only in merinos. It's certainly across British breeds and shedding breeds and people aren't aware of what their obligations should be if they're going to be a ram breeder."

Studs do not have to be registered to sell rams as breeding stock and, with some registered rams attracting 6-figure sale prices, producers wanting to rebuild quickly could opt for more affordable, unaccredited animals.

With graziers desperate for genetic diversity and numbers, falsely accredited rams had the potential to infect multiple flocks.

"One of the biggest problems from a producer's point of view is ... reproduction is king at the moment," Mr Roberts said.

"If a ram that's infected serves a ewe and a clean ram serves the same ewe, that's how it's transmitted."

Disease probably widespread in commercial flocks
------------------------------------------------
Goondiwindi veterinarian Mike Rival warned the disease was highly contagious and urged the whole industry, not just breeders, to conduct regular tests.

"It's not endemic, but it's basically a spot fire equivalent," Dr Rival said. "It's not just spread from ram to ewe to ram, but also from ram to ram."

He said poor fencing between neighbours could also widen the spread. "Then it will be the equivalent of a social disease and it could be 4 neighbours impacted by 1 operator who has got it in his flock," he said.

Dr Rival said infected animals were more likely to be attacked by wild dogs or feral pigs because the disease extended how long lambing took.

"Lambs can outrun predators after a certain period of time, but if it's a drawn-out lambing, then there are bigger windows for the predators to have an effect," he said.

But he said the current strategy of isolating and destroying rams carrying the disease was "wastage".

"You buy a ram expecting 5 years of working but they can become clinically affected and have impaired fertility within 6 months of purchase," Dr Rival said.

Lost faith and lost sheep
-------------------------
Many breeders lost faith in the voluntary accreditation scheme when, in 2015, false positive test results lead to the unnecessary destruction of rams which were not infected.

An investigation carried out by Biosecurity Queensland found issues with an antigen used during testing.

At the time, the Department of Agriculture confirmed testing protocols were changed to ensure repeat testing was performed on any positive tests.

Ovine brucellosis is not a notifiable disease in Queensland, meaning producers do not have to report to the state government if an animal tests positive, but they do have an obligation not to spread it.

A spokesman for Biosecurity Queensland said the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries' Biosecurity Sciences Laboratory (BSL), which processed the tests, was accredited by the National Association of Testing Authority (NATA) and had a Quality Management System in place.

"BSL participates in rounds of proficiency testing to ensure high levels of quality assurance of the laboratory's results," he said. "The last round of proficiency testing was conducted in December 2021 with a satisfactory outcome."

Dr Rival said he was confident the testing issues in Queensland were resolved, but acknowledged he also used out-of-state labs to test results. He said eradicating OB from a flock was too difficult, and instead urged Queensland to be more transparent with the voluntary accreditation scheme, similar to New South Wales.

"It's published on a website, where the stud breeders who are accredited are on a list," he said.

[Byline: Arlie Felton-Taylor and Maddelin McCosker]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED Rapporteur Mahmoud Orabi

[_Brucella ovis_ produces a disease unique to sheep, in which epididymitis and orchitis impair fertility -- the principal economic effect. Occasionally, placentitis and abortion are seen, and there may be perinatal mortality. The disease was 1st described in New Zealand and Australia and has since been reported from many sheep-raising areas of the world.

Rams, as young as 8 weeks, have been infected experimentally by various nonvenereal routes. The disease can be transmitted among rams by direct contact. Active infection in ewes is unusual but has developed after mating with naturally infected rams. Contaminated pastures do not appear to be important in the spread of the disease. Infection frequently persists in rams, and a high percentage shed _B. ovis_ intermittently for several years.

Because not all infected rams show palpable abnormalities of scrotal tissues (and not all cases of epididymitis are due to brucellosis), the remaining rams must be examined further. Rams shedding organisms, but having no lesions, must be identified by culture of semen. Repeated examinations may be necessary to identify intermittent shedders. Microscopic examination of stained semen smears may also be helpful; fluorescent antibody examination is a highly specific diagnostic aid. Serologic tests used for eradication of disease and certification of animals include ELISA, complement fixation, hemagglutination inhibition, indirect agglutination, and gel diffusion.

Incidence and spread of the disease may be reduced by regular examination of rams before the breeding season and culling of those with obvious genital abnormalities. Because susceptibility in rams increases markedly with age, it is advantageous to keep a young ram flock and isolate noninfected rams from older, possibly infected rams.

Immunization of rams has been practiced extensively in New Zealand using 2 doses of killed _B. ovis_ cells in adjuvant. Because infection in ewes apparently originates almost exclusively from service by infected rams, lamb losses through infection of ewes may be controlled economically by restricting vaccination to rams.

Chlortetracycline and streptomycin used concurrently have affected bacteriologic cures. However, treatment is not economic except in especially valuable rams, and even if infection is eliminated, fertility may remain impaired.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/110506.htm. and https://www.merckvetmanual.com/reproductive-system/brucellosis-in-large-animals/brucellosis-in-sheep.

Ovine brucellosis is an infection which causes disease and infertility in sheep. The prevalence of infection can be high if the disease is not controlled. Merinos show a lower incidence of disease compared to British breeds and crossbreds.

This form of brucellosis does not affect people.

Ovine brucellosis is present in Australia.

It has been reported in most major sheep-producing regions of the world and is present in Australia, New Zealand, the United States, South Africa and Europe.

Ovine brucellosis has not been reported in the United Kingdom.

The 1st sign of disease in a ram is:
• lower quality semen - acute oedema and inflammation of the scrotum may follow
• a mild systemic reaction, including fever and depression may occur
• palpable lesions develop in the epididymis and tunica of one or both testicles after about 9 weeks.

Affected rams have normal libido but reduced fertility to complete sterility.

When the number of affected rams in a flock is greater than about 10%, the fertility of the flock is appreciably decreased.

There are usually no clinical signs in the ewe but in some flocks, infection causes abortion or the birth of weak or stillborn lambs, associated with a placentitis.

Impacts
The consequences of infection in a flock are largely seen as a drop in flock fertility.

How it is spread
The infected ram is the source of infection and perpetuates the disease in a flock. The excretion of _B. ovis_ in the semen of infected rams is thought to continue indefinitely until the testicle becomes completely fibrosed. The main method of transmission is from ram to ram via the ewe's vagina during the mating season. During the non-breeding season spread can occur between rams when mounting each other or licking each other's prepuce.

Infection in ewes is short-lived but will persist in a few animals. Nevertheless, spread between ewes has not been noted. Lambs born to infected ewes and drinking their milk do not become infected.

The organism can survive on pasture for some months but this is not important in the spread of the disease.

Monitoring and action
The palpation of both testicles from behind will detect the lesions associated with brucellosis.

Blood samples may be collected for a complement fixation test (CFT). Where lesions are present in rams, sterile samples of epididymis, accessory glands and testicle can be taken at post-mortem for bacterial culture. Semen samples collected by electro-ejaculation can be examined for semen quality or cultured.

Control
Owners of commercial flocks should purchase rams from studs that are accredited under the Ovine Brucellosis Accreditation Scheme.

Good management of the rams will keep the disease at a low level.

Good fences are important in keeping neighbouring rams out.

Virgin rams and those known to be free of infection should be kept separate from older rams or those suspected of being infected.

All rams should be palpated every 6 months and those with palpable lesions of the reproductive organs should be culled.

Individual treatment is not a suitable option.

Vaccination is not available in Australia. (Extracted from https://www.business.qld.gov.au/industries/farms-fishing-forestry/agriculture/livestock/animal-welfare/pests-diseases-disorders/ovine-brucellosis)

Sheep are quite a major commodity in Australia. Perhaps, they should consider vaccination.

If eradication of the disease is feasible, it might require vaccination, or some sort of mandatory accreditation program. Perhaps retesting of ewes and rams prior to sale?

If an area is large enough, perhaps adequate pasture rotation may help eliminate the disease, and of course good fences make for good neighbors. - Mod.TG

ProMED map:
Queensland, Australia: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8706041,285]
See Also
2012
----
Brucellosis, ovine - Australia: (NS) 20121120.1416424
2010
----
Brucellosis, ovine - Australia: (VI) 20100825.2980
Brucellosis, ovine - Croatia: (SD) OIE 20100418.1258
2009
----
Brucellosis, ovine, bovine - Russia: (CV) 20090423.1530
2008
----
Brucellosis, ovine, human - Russia (Altai) 20080902.2749
Brucellosis, ovine - Russia (Moscow ex Volgograd) (02) 20080318.1047
Brucellosis, ovine - Russia (Moscow ex Volgograd) 20080317.104
.................................................tg/may/jh
</body>
