<header id=001796>
Published Date: 2014-05-11 16:17:51 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Trypanosomiasis, canines - USA: (TX)
Archive Number: 20140511.2465156
</header>
<body id=001796>
TRYPANOSOMIASIS, CANINES - USA: (TEXAS)
***************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 7 May 2014
Source: Houston Chronicle [edited]
http://www.chron.com/sports/outdoors/article/Bugs-kiss-a-major-threat-to-dogs-5461828.php


Dogs were dying in their kennels on a ranch in Brooks County, and no one knew why. "We had a half-dozen dogs -- Labs, pointers -- die: They'd just fall over," Berdon Lawrence said. "Nobody knew what was going on."

Lawrence, a Houston businessman, recalled one dog in particular that made him determined to discover what was happening to the working canines housed on his South Texas ranch. On a quail hunt, a seemingly perfectly healthy pointer was zigzagging through the brush. "The pointer was working quail and just fell over, dead," Lawrence said. "It didn't make any sense."

Concerned that something associated with the kennel was causing the sudden deaths, Lawrence sent one of the deceased dogs to Texas A&M Veterinary Diagnostic Lab (TVMDL) for a necropsy. The results stunned him.

"The diagnosis came back as a heart attack caused by Chagas disease," he said. "I said, 'What's Chagas disease?' I'd never heard of it." Neither have most Texans. They should. And they almost certainly will. The parasite-caused disease, which in many cases causes fatal, heart-related problems, potentially is a serious threat to human health in Texas. It already is a threat to the state's canine population.

"We know we have Chagas disease in Texas, and Texas is emerging as a hot spot," said Dr. Sarah Hamer, assistant professor and associate wildlife biologist with Texas A&M University's College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences. "There is a growing crisis of canine Chagas in Texas."

Hamer was among speakers at a day-long "Chagas Disease in Texas" symposium held Tuesday [6 May 2014] in Kingsville and hosted by the South Texas Private Property Rights Association and Texas A&M-Kingsville's Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute.

While there are no hard data on the number of dogs in Texas that are infected with the parasite causing Chagas disease or the number that die from its effects, anecdotal evidence indicates hundreds and probably thousands of Texas dogs die from its effects each year.

"It is a significant problem," Dr. Glen Wilkinson, a veterinarian in Premont in Jim Wells County and one of the attendees at the Kingsville gathering, said, noting he has seen "over 100 dogs in the past couple of years" that have tested positive for the protozoan parasite that causes Chagas disease.

Chagas disease is hardly an unknown malady. The disease long has been a major human health issue in Mexico, Central and South America, where it is estimated to infect as many as 8 million people and annually cause as many 25 000 human deaths.

The disease is caused by a protozoa, _Trypanosoma cruzi_, that, once in a mammalian host, circulates in the blood until it finds a smooth muscle tissue -- usually in the heart -- where it takes up residence and begins damaging that tissue. Often, the 1st clinical signs of the disease in dogs is sudden death from heart failure.

There are currently no vaccines that prevent the disease; treatments are invariably minimally effective, and there is no cure for Chagas disease.

The protozoa are transmitted to the host by insects, specifically those of the genus _Triatoma_. Commonly called "kissing bugs," the winged insects have a flat, pear-shaped body and an elongated, cone-shaped head with a prominent "beak." That beak is used to puncture skin and gorge on blood from a mammal.

Kissing bugs invariably do their feeding at night, emerging from brush piles, cracks, crevasses, thick grasses and similar habitat. They crawl onto their victims, often drawn by the carbon dioxide the mammal exhales, and take a bite. This bite often occurs near the victim's mouth, thus the name "kissing bug."

The protozoan parasite carried by the insect isn't injected during the bite but is deposited in feces typically loosed after the blood meal. The victim typically scratches the bite, smearing the feces into the wound or otherwise introducing it to the body.

If dogs are bitten by a kissing bug in Texas, odds are high that bug carries the parasite causing Chagas disease. And those bugs are found in much of Texas. Seven species of _Triatoma_ have been identified across the state, with the largest numbers in southern and central Texas.

"In every place we have got the insects, we have found positives," Dr. Teresa Feria, assistant professor in the biology department of University of Texas-Pan American, told symposium attendees.

The problem is not confined to South Texas. Half of the kissing bugs collected in Kerr County of Central Texas tested positive for the parasite.

With no preventative vaccine and no effective treatment for Chagas disease, the best practice for dog owners is to reduce chances their dogs will encounter a kissing bug.

Owners of dogs kept in kennels should install screening around the runs to help prevent the insects from having an unimpeded path to a sleeping dog, Dr. Greta Schuster, Texas A&M-Kingsville professor of integrated pest management, said at the Chagas symposium.

These are the tactics Berdon Lawrence pursued on his South Texas ranch. They installed screens around the chain-link fence kennels. They cleared vegetation from around the kennel and regularly applied insecticide around the perimeter.

The result was positive. Since making those changes several years ago, the ranch has lost only one dog to Chagas disease, said Lawrence.

"Chagas disease is a problem," Lawrence said. "The good news is, if you know about it, you can do something about it."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The parasite _Trypanosoma cruzi_ causes Chagas disease in humans, dogs, and other mammals. The insect vector, commonly known as the kissing bug, can transmit the parasite to hosts by biting and subsequently defecating near the site of the bite. The parasites live in the digestive tract of the bugs and are shed in the bug feces. When infectious bug fecal material contaminates the mucous membranes or the site of a bug bite on a mammal, transmission of the parasite can occur. While this "vector-fecal" transmission route is thought to be the most common mode of transmission for humans, dogs can also become infected through the consumption of infected bugs. Additionally, the parasite can be transmitted congenitally, through blood transfusion, and through transplantation of infected organs.

Chagas disease is endemic throughout central and South America and is increasingly recognized as both a human and veterinary health concern in the southern US. Chagas disease became a reportable disease in Texas in 2013.

Kissing bugs are nocturnal, blood-feeding insects that are members of the Reduviidae family of insects. Other reduviids that are similar in appearance feed on plants and other insects and can inflict a painful bite when disturbed; however, only kissing bugs are known to transmit the Chagas parasite.

Kissing bugs are found throughout the Americas. In the US, kissing bugs are established in 28 states. A total of 11 different species of kissing bugs have been documented in the US, with the highest diversity and density in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona (Bernet al 2011). Previous studies have found that, on average, 50 percent of kissing bugs are infected with the Chagas parasite.

Kissing bugs develop into adults after a series of immature life stages called nymphs, and both nymphs and adults engage in blood-feeding behavior. Bugs feed on diverse wild and domestic animals including wild rodents, other wild mammals, and domestic dogs. Many of the species of animals upon which kissing bugs feed can serve as a source of parasite infection to the bug, and the _Trypanosoma cruzi_ parasite has been found to infect domestic dogs, humans, opossums, woodrats, armadillos, coyotes, mice, raccoons, skunks, and foxes (Bern et al. 2011). Therefore, Chagas disease emerges at the intersection of wildlife, domestic animals, humans, and vector populations.

In dogs, infection with the Chagas parasite can cause severe heart disease; however, many infected dogs may remain asymptomatic. There is variation in the degree of complications that likely relate to the age of the dog, the activity level of the dog, and the genetic strain of the parasite. Cardiac rhythm abnormalities and sudden death may occur, as well as bloat due to reduced cardiac function and inability to properly pump fluids throughout the body. Testing for canine Chagas disease is in the form of a blood test and is available through the Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory. Blood is screened for antibodies to the _T. cruzi_ parasite, and a positive result indicates that the dog has been exposed at some time in past. Unfortunately, treatment options are not readily available, although some research teams are developing new treatment approaches that are promising. There is currently no vaccination that protects against Chagas disease for either dogs or humans.

Especially in the southern regions of the US and in Mexico, this parasite is risk to humans. Human illness has 2 forms, the acute and chronic phases. The acute form may be asymptomatic for weeks to months and may be difficult to diagnose as the signs of the disease mimic many other diseases. Acute phase signs may include fever, fatigue, vomiting, and diarrhea, and, therefore, resemble other health problems. The chronic phase is when cardiac difficulties are noticed. Of those infected with the parasite, only approximately 30 percent will develop cardiac signs.

This is not a new disease but over time has become more prevalent as the bug has increased its territory and the awareness of the problem has grown.

Portions of this comment were extracted from: http://vetmed.tamu.edu/media/650149/article%20for%20press.pdf. This resource also provides photos of the bug and a map of the distribution of where the bugs may be found and the spreading of the disease in both canines and people.

Texas may be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/awDn. - Mod.TG]
See Also
2013
----
Trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) - USA (03): (TX) canine 20131008.1989394
Trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) - USA (02): (TX) wildlife, comment 20130324.1600665
Trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) - USA: (TX) wildlife 20130316.1590053
.................................................jw/tg/msp/lm
</body>
