<header id=017796>
Published Date: 2016-03-01 12:34:00 EST
Subject: PRO/ALL> Obituary: Paul Nicoletti
Archive Number: 20160301.4061702
</header>
<body id=017796>
OBITUARY: PAUL NICOLETTI
************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 26 Feb 2016
From: Mo Salmon <m.d.salman@colostate.edu> [edited]


Dr. Paul Nicoletti was a veterinary epidemiologist who spent the bulk of his career with the USDA and the University of Florida's College of Veterinary Medicine. Nicoletti made significant contributions to US animal health by improving the procedures used to control bovine brucellosis, most notably, he was the driving force behind the investigation and ultimate implementation of adult vaccination for brucellosis. It was only through adult vaccination that the U.S. ultimately arrived at brucellosis free status. He was an internationally recognized authority on bovine brucellosis.

Dr, Nicoletti's students benefited immensely from his repeated admonitions to question everything, to be wary of assumptions, and to focus on disease prevention.

Nicoletti was born in 1932 in Goodman, Missouri and grew up on a small dairy farm. He graduated from the University of Missouri's College of Veterinary Medicine in 1956. In 1962, he earned a master's degree from the University of Wisconsin, where he wrote his thesis on brucellosis. From 1962 to 1968, Nicoletti worked as a USDA regional epidemiologist in Albany, New York. In this capacity, he began conducting field investigations of brucellosis. From 1968 to 1972, he served in Iran as a veterinary epidemiologist consultant for the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. He then returned to the United States and to his work as a regional epidemiologist with the USDA. In 1975, he was transferred to Gainesville, Florida, where his focus was once again on brucellosis. In 1978, Nicoletti joined the faculty at the University of Florida's College of Veterinary Medicine, where he taught courses in infectious diseases, epidemiology, public health, and food safety. He influenced many young veterinary students to consider careers in agriculture and public health.

Nicoletti was a member of the American Association of Bovine Practitioners, the Florida Cattlemen's Association, and the American Association of Food Hygiene Veterinarians. He was a past president of the American Veterinary Medical Association, the American College of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, the Florida Veterinary Medical Association, the Alachua County Veterinary Medical Association, and Animal Disease Research Workers in the Southern States.

Over the course of his long and distinguished career, Nicoletti received numerous awards and honors. In 1994 he was named Veterinarian of the Year by the Florida Veterinary Medical Association, and in 2003, he was presented with the Distinguished Service Award by the University of Florida's College of Veterinary Medicine. His most prestigious award came in 2010 when he was recognized with the Meyer-Steele Gold Head Cane Award, the highest honor of the American Veterinary Epidemiology Society. This award recognizes scientists who have significantly advanced human health through the practice of veterinary epidemiology and public health. Dr. Nicoletti retired from the University of Florida in 2003. He has 2 grown daughters, Julie and Nancy.

--
Mo Salman
Animal Population Health Institute - Colorado State University
<m.d.salman@colostate.edu>

[Paul is possibly best remembered for his aggressive attitude to bovine brucellosis. The large commercial bovine dairy herds in Florida were severely afflicted with this disease in spite of the control programme. And in some ways, this programme made the situation worse as progress could be very slow with multiple tests each year. Against the instructions of his bosses, in the late 1970s, he initiated an adult vaccination programme using S19, and the disease stopped in Florida.

A few years later, from 1980-82, I was involved with Fred Enright in a similar trial when we applied Paul's program, which had succeeded in Florida dairy herds, to extensively managed beef herds in the Louisiana Gulf Coast ranges beef herds using diluted (1/24) S19 vaccine on adult beef cattle and delayed testing. These herds are only worked twice a year, in the spring and fall, I well remember going out to at least 3 meetings at local high schools called by our Agriculture Commissioner, Bob Odom, who preached to his ranchers like some evangelical minister about how they must join this new calf and adult vaccination programme. We had a number of herds that had been decimated by reactor culling at least 3 times; he asked that ranchers with reactors should stand up. They did, and there were many; over 50 percent of these coastal range herds were under quarantine, overall with an 8 percent prevalence. Once started, we found that new reactors stopped appearing after some 6-plus months. The disease was no longer contagious, and in 4 herds where reactors were allowed to remain, it made no statistical difference though much appreciated by the owners. The dilute S19 only produced a temporary titre in the cows, and after some 6-plus months the true reactors still had high titres, differentiating them from the temporary false reactors produced by the adult S19 vaccination. True reactors were identified with an "R" brand and were under a convenience culling order, e.g., to be sold for slaughter at the annual herd culling, which made life much easier for the ranchers. In 2 years, these herds were free of brucellosis, and we were enjoying its eradication. A more suitable RB 51 vaccine took over, and we were ready for a successful national eradication programme. We are not there yet, as reactors are still appearing sporadically in Montana and Wyoming, claimed to be as a result of a reservoir in wildlife. - Mod.MHJ

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=4061702,106.]

.................................................lm/mhj/msp/dk
</body>
