<header id=000442>
Published Date: 2015-06-25 09:48:11 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Equine influenza - USA: (OR)
Archive Number: 20150625.3463124
</header>
<body id=000442>
EQUINE INFLUENZA - USA: (OREGON)
********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 23 Jun 2015
Source: The Horse [edited]
http://www.thehorse.com/articles/35978/equine-influenza-reported-in-oregon


Bend Equine Medical Center, in Bend [Deschutes County], Oregon, reported 22 Jun 2015 that equine influenza has been confirmed in several horses that competed at the Far West Championship Horse Show, held 17-20 Jun 2015 at the Deschutes County Fairgrounds, in Redmond.

"As show veterinarians for the Far West Championship Horse Show, we have been involved in the care of horses affected by an outbreak of a contagious upper respiratory infection," the clinic said in a statement on its Facebook page 20 Jun 2015. "There are currently 15 affected horses, ranging in age from 1 to 7 years old. 14 of the 15 are from one barn on the grounds. Affected horses are showing fevers, coughing, nasal discharge, and lethargy."

None of those horses showed neurologic signs, and none received any treatment other than flunixin meglumine (Banamine) [non-steroidal analgesic agent with anti-inflammatory and antipyretic activity], the clinic said. At that time, the clinic asked owners of affected horses to self-quarantine their horses at home for at least 2 weeks and for owners of all horses that attended the show to monitor their horses for fevers or other signs of infection. Clinic veterinarians collected blood and nasal swab samples to identify the infectious agent.

On [22 Jun 2015], the clinic reported that the Oregon State University (OSU) Veterinary Diagnostic Lab tested samples from 3 of the affected horses and confirmed them to be positive for equine influenza A virus.

"The samples were negative for equine herpesvirus-1 and -4 and for equine viral arteritis," the [22 Jun 2015] statement read. "The remainder of the samples will be tested via Merck's Equine Respiratory Pathogen Surveillance Program at the University of California, Davis, Veterinary Diagnostic Lab (on [23 Jun 2015]), but we expect the results will confirm OSU's.

"All affected horses are recovering with only symptomatic treatment, though the number of cases has increased to approximately the mid-20s that we are aware of as of today [23 Jun 2015]," the clinic's statement said.

Influenza spreads quickly via aerosol transmission, meaning affected horses can spread the disease every time they cough or sneeze. The equine influenza virus can persist in the environment (on inanimate objects) for two to three days.

Clinical signs often include high fever typically lasting 2 to 4 days; a dry, hacking cough; loss of appetite; muscle soreness; and nasal discharge.

Bend Equine Medical Center advised owners to quarantine infected horses for at least 21 days and any exposed, but asymptomatic, horses for at least 14 days. The clinic also recommended resting infected horses from work for one week for every day of fever they experienced to reduce the risk of cardiac muscle damage.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The state of Oregon can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3463124,15421. The city of Bend, county seat of Deschutes County, can be seen on the map at http://geology.com/county-map/oregon-county-map.gif. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ

Equine influenza, caused by the orthomyxovirus equine influenza A type 2 (A/equine 2), is one of the most common infectious diseases of the respiratory tract of horses. It is endemic in the equine population of the United States and throughout much of the world, with the notable exceptions of New Zealand and Iceland. Equine influenza virus does not constantly circulate, even in large groups of horses, but is sporadically introduced by an infected horse. This epidemiologic finding and the rapid elimination of the virus by the equine immune response suggest that infection can be avoided by preventing entry of the virus into an equine population (that is, by the quarantine of newly arriving horses for at least 14 days), and by appropriate vaccination before exposure. All horses should be vaccinated against equine influenza unless they live in a closed and isolated facility.

To date, the most important factors associated with increased risk of infection have been identified as:
1. Age: horses 1 to 5 years old are more susceptible. Older horses are generally less susceptible to infection, but immunity can be overwhelmed in horses frequently exposed at shows or similar athletic events.
2. Serum concentrations of influenza virus-specific antibody: the importance of local mucosal protection is difficult to quantitate by methods currently available.
3. Frequent contact with large numbers of horses.

Equine influenza is highly contagious and the virus spreads rapidly through groups of horses in aerosolized droplets dispersed by coughing. The severity of clinical signs depends on the degree of existing immunity, among other factors. Horses that are partially immune can become subclinically infected and shed virus. Immunity to the same (homologous) strain of virus following natural infection persists for approximately one year. Immunity following vaccination with inactivated influenza vaccines can be short-lived, allowing recently vaccinated horses to become infected and shed virus, thereby contributing to maintenance and spread of infection within the equine population. For these reasons, only vaccines of proven efficacy should be selected for use.

Although influenza is endemic in many countries and circulates continuously in the equine population, explosive outbreaks occur at intervals of several years when the immunity of the equine population wanes, and sufficient antigenic drift in the virus has occurred, allowing the virus to evade vaccinal immunity. Antigenic drift, by generating antigenically heterologous viruses, reduces the degree and duration of protection conferred by previous infection or vaccination. Although antigenic drift of equine influenza virus is slower than that of human influenza virus, it is still recommended that equine vaccines contain killed viral antigens from isolates obtained within the most recent 5 years.

The 2010 OIE Expert Surveillance Panel on equine influenza vaccine composition had a number of findings and recommendations:
- All equine influenza virus isolates in the previous 2 years (2008-09) were of the American lineage (Florida sublineage), and comprised 2 clades: clade 1 was identified in North America, and parts of Europe; and clade 2 was identified in Europe and parts of Asia. Global surveillance is likely insufficient to assure that these geographic restrictions are absolute but it seems likely that the equine influenza viruses circulating in North America are all from clade 1, that is, A/South Africa/2003-like or A/Ohio/2003-like.

- Because of the antigenic differences between Florida clade 1 and clade 2, it is possible that vaccination with only one of these antigens will not fully protect against disease caused by the other. However, at this time there is no evidence of a vaccine failure resulting from this phenomenon. This means that North American horses vaccinated with a clade 1 virus, such as A/Ohio/2003-like, should be protected from current circulating North American influenza viruses, but may not be fully protected if they travel overseas, or in the event that clade 2 viruses are introduced to North America, for example in a horse transported here for competition.

- The OIE panel recommended that vaccines contain examples of both clade 1 (for example, A/South Africa/2003-like or A/Ohio/2003-like) and clade 2 (A/Richmond/1/2007) viruses particularly for horses traveling internationally.

- The absence of any isolation of Eurasian lineage influenza virus means these viruses no longer need to be included in vaccines. Historically, equine influenza vaccines have been administered at intervals as short as every 3 months to horses considered at high risk of infection. All currently marketed equine influenza vaccines are likely to provide protection of at least six months duration. This is true for both of the modified live vaccines on the market today, and for inactivated vaccines. This performance depends on the quality of currently marketed vaccines, and maintaining this performance will depend on the inclusion of any new antigenically distinct equine influenza viruses that may appear in the horse population in the future.

Vaccines
--------
There are 3 types of equine influenza virus vaccine currently marketed:
- Inactivated vaccines:
Each of these has been shown to be efficacious in providing protection against clinical disease and viral shedding when used appropriately. These vaccines frequently include multiple strains of equine influenza virus A2 representing the major circulating strains. Some of these vaccines also contain the A1 strain (now thought to be extinct), because this was part of their original formulation; this strain will likely be phased out of all equine vaccines in time. The majority of these vaccines require 2-dose priming regimens, although a 3-dose priming regimen is recommended here as described below; a 3-dose regimen is required for at least one of the most effective inactivated vaccines. These vaccines are well suited to pre-foaling boosters designed to increase colostral antibody levels against influenza virus.

- Modified-live (MLV) cold-adapted equine influenza /A2 vaccine:
This product is administered intranasally. The vaccine has proven to be very safe and a single administration to naive horses is protective for 12 months, although only a 6-month claim is made on the product data sheet. Circulating antibody responses post-vaccination are minimal, suggesting that that other factors, such as local protection at the nasal mucosa may be enhanced by this vaccine. The product is licensed for vaccination of non-pregnant animals over 11 months of age using a single dose of vaccine, followed by boosters at 6-month intervals. Generally, horses shed vaccinal virus for less than 1 week after vaccination. However, the amount and duration of shed vaccinal virus is so minimal that other horses in contact with them will not be vaccinated. Incorporation of the MLV vaccine into a program, which previously used inactivated vaccine, can be easily accomplished by just substituting the MLV when routine boosters are scheduled.

Experience strongly supports the safety of the MLV intranasal vaccine when administered to foals less than 11 months of age. Similarly, the vaccine is protective when administered to foals 6 months of age or older. The onset of protection in previously unvaccinated naive horses has been documented as early as 7 days after vaccination. The vaccine is not recommended for vaccination of mares in late pregnancy to boost colostral antibodies, as data available to date suggest that circulating antibody responses to vaccination are low.

- Canary pox vector vaccine:
This product is to be administered by intra-muscular injection and has been shown to provide protection of at least 6 months duration. A 2-dose priming regimen is recommended, with boosters at a 6-month interval. The vaccine is safe to use in foals as young as 4 months of age, and there is some evidence of efficacy in the face of maternal immunity. Because this vaccine generates high levels of antibody response, it is likely to be suitable for pre-foaling boosters.

Vaccination schedules
---------------------
- Adult horses, previously vaccinated:
Mature performance, show, or pleasure horses constantly at risk of exposure should be revaccinated at 6-month intervals. Other adult horses could be vaccinated as infrequently as once a year.

- Adult horses, unvaccinated or having an unknown vaccination history:
Either one dose of the MLV intranasal vaccine or a 2-dose series of canary pox vector vaccine at a 4- to 6-week interval (revaccinate semi-annually) or a primary series of 3 doses of the inactivated-virus vaccines is recommended. The ideal intervals between these vaccinations are 3 to 4 weeks between the 1st and the 2nd vaccination, followed by an interval ideally as long as 3 to 6 months before the 3rd vaccination. This regimen generally induces higher and more persistent antibody titers than those induced by use of the previously recommended 2-dose initial series. Subsequent revaccination should be at intervals of 6 to 12 months, depending on the age of the horse as well as the degree and duration of risk of acquiring infection.

- Pregnant broodmares, previously vaccinated:
Vaccinate 4 to 6 weeks before foaling using an inactivated-virus vaccine or the canary pox vectored vaccine.

- Pregnant broodmares, unvaccinated or having an unknown vaccination history:
Use a 3-dose series of the inactivated-virus vaccines, with the 2nd dose administered 4 to 6 weeks after the 1st dose and the 3rd dose administered 4 to 6 weeks pre-partum. With a canary pox vector vaccine, a 2-dose series is recommended with the 2nd dose administered 4 to 6 weeks after the 1st dose but no later than 4 weeks pre-partum.

- Foals of vaccinated mares:
Administer either a single dose of the MLV intranasal vaccine (2 doses are recommended if foal is less than 11 months of age, 1st dose at 6 to 7 months of age and 2nd dose at 11 to 12 months of age) or a primary series of 2 doses of canary pox vector vaccine at a 5- week interval or 3 doses of inactivated-virus vaccine beginning at 6 months of age. The recommended intervals between these vaccinations with an inactivated-virus vaccine are 4 to 6 weeks between the 1st and the 2nd vaccinations. The 3rd dose should be administered between 10 and 12 months of age.

- Foals of nonvaccinated mares:
Administer either a single dose of the MLV intranasal vaccine (2 doses are recommended if foal is less than 11 months of age, 1st dose at 6 to 7 months of age and 2nd dose at 11 to 12 months of age) or a primary series of 2 doses of canary pox vector vaccine at a 5-week interval or 3 doses of inactivated virus vaccine at 6 months of age (see above), unless there is an unusual threat that recommends earlier vaccination. Because some maternal anti-influenza antibody is still likely to be present, a complete series of primary vaccinations should still be given after 6 months of age.

Outbreak mitigation
-------------------
Vaccination to boost immunity in the face of an outbreak may be a valuable strategy if the outbreak is detected early enough. In previously vaccinated horses, any vaccine can be used for this purpose. In unvaccinated horses, or horses with an unknown vaccination history, the early onset of immunity after administration of the intranasal product (protection within 7 days), may recommend it for use. The use of a canary pox vectored vaccine may also be considered for this purpose (see AAEP Infectious Disease Control Guidelines -- Influenza at http://www.aaep.org/custdocs/Influenza%20guidelines.pdf?osCsid=6vnh0hopr7b3evpjttdr1lcvo1).

This comment has been extracted from the American Association of Equine Practitioners' (AAEP) webpage at http://www.aaep.org/info/equine-influenza.

Additional information regarding equine influenza may be found at http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.05.07_EQ_INF.pdf. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Equine influenza, equine - UK: (England, Scotland) 20150327.3260734
2014
----
Equine influenza, equine - UK (04): (Scotland) 20141127.2993174
Equine influenza, equine - UK (03): (England, Scotland) 20141106.2935059
Equine influenza, equine - UK (02): (England, Scotland) 20140926.2807480
Equine influenza, equine - UK: (England) 20140326.2359793
.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
