<header id=021403>
Published Date: 2015-07-08 09:59:41 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Melioidosis - USA (07): 2008-2013
Archive Number: 20150708.3492439
</header>
<body id=021403>
MELIOIDOSIS - USA (07): 2008-2013
*********************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 3 Jul 2015
Source: MMWR Surveillance Summaries 64(SS05);1-9 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6405a1.htm?s_cid=ss6405a1_w


Melioidosis cases and selected reports of occupational exposures to _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ -- USA, 2008-2013
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduction
------------
Melioidosis is a bacterial infection caused by _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ (formerly known as _Pseudomonas pseudomallei_ or Whitmore's bacillus), which is found in many tropical regions of the world (1). _B. pseudomallei_ has been designated as a Tier 1 overlap select agent, which can affect both humans and animals. Select agents have the potential to pose a severe threat to public, animal, or plant health or to animal or plant products (2). Identification of the pathogen _B. pseudomallei_ must be reported to the Federal Select Agent Program immediately (that is, within 24 hours). However, melioidosis is not considered a nationally notifiable condition (that is, reportable condition in all jurisdictions), and reporting of human infections and exposures associated with animal infections to BSPB is voluntary.

Infection with _B. pseudomallei_ usually occurs through direct contact with an environmental source (soil or water) by ingestion, percutaneous inoculation, or inhalation of the bacterium. No vaccine is available to prevent melioidosis. The best ways to prevent infection are by 1) avoiding contact with contaminated soil or water by wearing appropriate footwear and gloves, especially in areas where the disease is endemic (3), 2) using purified or clean water for drinking, hand washing, and food preparation (4), and 3) in the laboratory setting, working with isolates in a biosafety cabinet and wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) (e.g., gloves and an appropriate mask or respirator) (5).

Both humans and animals can become infected with _B. pseudomallei_. Infections have been identified in domestic animals (for example, sheep, goats, swine, cattle, horses, dogs, and cats) and certain wildlife species, including primates (6-12). Although human-to-human transmission is rare, at least 1 case has been reported involving sexual transmission (13), 1 case involving breastfeeding (14), and 7 neonatal cases (15-17). Incidents involving occupational exposure (for example, laboratory testing of human and animal isolates) also have occurred (18,19); however, these exposures did not result in infection. These incidents often involved persons working with insufficient PPE or with high concentrations of bacteria in a laboratory setting outside of a biosafety cabinet. High-risk exposures included needle stick injuries, bites or scratches by infected experimental animals, splash events involving the mouth or eyes, or activities that generated aerosols outside of a biosafety cabinet. In a 2005 incident, several persons were exposed after an isolate was handled outside of a biosafety cabinet (19). Occupational exposures involved more than 1 facility because isolates were tested in several facilities before identification of _B. pseudomallei_ was confirmed by a Laboratory Response Network (LRN) member or CDC.

The incubation period for melioidosis generally ranges from 1 to 21 days, with a median of 9 days; however, latent infections can occur, with disease manifesting decades after exposure (3). In 1 documented case, a patient was diagnosed with reactivated disease 62 years after initial exposure (20). Although some infections are asymptomatic, the disease can manifest as localized, pulmonary, or bacteremia/disseminated infections. Pneumonia is the commonest clinical presentation (3). Clinical presentation can be acute or chronic. Signs and symptoms of melioidosis often mimic other diseases (for example, other community-acquired pneumonias or tuberculosis), resulting in possible misdiagnosis of the condition. For these reasons, melioidosis is often referred to as the "Great Mimicker" (21). Other clinical presentations include ulcers or other skin lesions, gastrointestinal ulceration, sepsis, or infections and abscesses involving internal organs (for example, the spleen, prostate, kidney, or liver). In addition, persons with certain underlying medical conditions are at greater risk for manifesting disease symptoms; therefore, melioidosis is considered an opportunistic infection. Medical conditions that predispose persons for melioidosis include diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, chronic lung disease, chronic renal disease, liver disease, hematologic malignancy, thalassemia, cancer, long-term steroid use, and other non-HIV-related immune suppressed conditions (22).

Confirmation of melioidosis is achieved with isolation of _B. pseudomallei_ from clinical specimens (for example, blood, urine, sputum, throat swabs, or pus from abscesses or wounds). Early diagnosis and treatment is critical in reducing the mortality rate from this disease, which can be up to 90 per cent in septic patients with delayed diagnosis and treatment (3).

Treatment of melioidosis consists of 2 phases: an intensive phase, followed by an eradication phase. The intensive phase involves intravenous antimicrobial therapy for a minimum of 10 days with ceftazidime, meropenem, or imipenem. The eradication phase consists of oral therapy with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) for 3-6 months (22). Occasionally, in minor localized skin infections, treatment with oral TMP/SMX alone can be used (23).

This is the 1st CDC report that summarizes data on confirmed melioidosis cases and occupational exposures to _B. pseudomallei_ that occurred during 2008-2013. The findings in this report can be used by providers and public health officials to assess the importance of making melioidosis a nationally notifiable condition. Furthermore, the purpose of this report also is to raise awareness of the disease among clinicians as well as persons traveling abroad.

Methods
-------
Data sources: BSPB at CDC receives voluntary reports of human and animal melioidosis cases, and sporadically receives reports of occupational exposures from state health departments, medical facilities, microbiologic laboratories, and research facilities by email or phone call. Occupational exposure reports are usually received in the context of a request for technical consultation (so that the system does not include the full complement of the mandatory and confidential reporting to the Federal Select Agent Program). Therefore, it is possible that BSPB might have received duplicate reports of exposures already reported to the Federal Select Agent Program.

Since 2010, BSPB has used a secure Access database, requiring a unique username and password, to collect and store data on voluntarily reported suspected or confirmed melioidosis cases and occupational exposures. Occupational exposures are incidents that occur during laboratory procedures or research activities. Such exposures are usually identified during investigations of reported cases. Investigation of occupational exposures often includes working with state health departments to trace back the origin of the specimen to determine facilities that have handled or processed the specimen. State health department investigators will then contact each facility to determine any exposures that might have occurred during diagnostic testing. In the USA, clinical laboratory staff working on isolates from patients with melioidosis commonly have potential exposure to _B. pseudomallei_ because melioidosis is rarely part of the differential diagnosis and they typically perform work with less than recommended biosafety precautions for this select agent. Research exposures are those exposures that occurred as a result of manipulating _B. pseudomallei_ for research purposes. The select agent program mandates that facilities handling _B. pseudomallei_ must be registered, inspected, cleared, and approved for such research activities (2). In follow up to reports of occupational exposures, BSPB often provides technical assistance to state health departments to identify all persons with possible exposures, define level of risk, and provide recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis and health monitoring of exposed persons.

Each reported melioidosis case is assigned a unique identification number and data are deduplicated. Data collected for suspected melioidosis cases include the patient's demographic information, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, travel history, country of birth, and risk factors, and data from occupational exposures resulting from testing the patient isolate. Data for research exposures include activities resulting in exposure, the number of exposed persons, exposure risk level (high versus low) of exposed persons, disease risk factors of exposed persons, and information related to postexposure prophylaxis recommendations and compliance. Data for laboratory exposures include the number of laboratories involved in testing or processing the patient specimen and the number of laboratories that were determined to have known, no, or unknown exposures. For each laboratory facility with exposures, the following data are collected: activities resulting in exposure, number of exposed persons, exposure risk level (high versus low) of exposed persons (24), disease risk factors of exposed persons, and information related to postexposure prophylaxis recommendations and compliance.

Surveillance case definitions and classification: All suspected cases, whether reported to states or to CDC, are classified as probable or confirmed on the basis of the 2011 standardized Council of State and Territorial Epidemologists case definition (25,26), which considers clinical, laboratory, and epidemiologic evidence. For the purpose of surveillance reporting and classification, clinical evidence includes signs and symptoms consistent with melioidosis or documentation of laboratory diagnosis in a patient's record or death certificate. Signs and symptoms consistent with melioidosis can vary on a case-by-case basis and include 1 or more of the following symptoms: fever >38C (>100.4F); headache; myalgia, anorexia; chest pain; skin abscess; ulcer; nodule; respiratory distress; abdominal discomfort; joint pain; abscess in the liver, spleen, or prostate; disorientation; weight loss; or seizure.

Melioidosis is confirmed on the basis of isolation of the bacteria from any clinical specimen and characterization by the LRN algorithm (27). Isolation of _B. pseudomallei_ is considered confirmatory regardless of clinical presentation because these bacteria are not considered commensal. Probable cases are those that meet the clinical case definition and also 1 or more of the following laboratory results: detection of _B. pseudomallei_ by the LRN real-time polymerase chain reaction for _Burkholderia_ spp., a fourfold increase in antibody titer by the Indirect Hemagglutination Assay (IHA) or titer above 1:40 using IHA (25,26).

Analysis
--------
This report summarizes data collected during 2008-2013. Findings are presented by 3 domains. 1st, the total number of suspected and confirmed melioidosis cases reported to BSPB is presented. Excel was used to perform univariate analysis to describe selected characteristics of confirmed melioidosis cases. Variables analyzed for confirmed cases include the year that the case was reported to BSPB, the patient's demographics (age, sex, and state or territory), travel history, country of origin, medical conditions, risk factors, possible risk of exposure (if known), and clinical outcome (whether the patient survived or died). 2nd, the number of reported incidents with possible occupational exposure involving research activities reported to BPSB was counted and findings are presented by state, year, and clinical outcome. 3rd, the number of persons at risk for occupational exposure to _B. pseudomallei_ while performing laboratory diagnostics is presented by risk level (high, low, or none) and specimen category (that is, specimen related to melioidosis case [human or animal infection] or reported incidents with possible occupational exposure involving research activities). Risk level was determined according to criteria in the guidance for "Management of accidental laboratory exposure to _Burkholderia pseudomallei and B. mallei_" (24). These at-risk persons were identified by working with state health departments to review each facility that handled the pathogen.

Results
-------
During 2008-2013, a total of 47 suspected melioidosis cases were reported to BSPB, and 37 confirmed cases are described in this report. The 10 cases excluded from this analysis included 4 human cases in non-USA residents who never traveled to the USA (isolates for all the cases were forwarded to USA laboratories for test confirmation only and no associated laboratory exposures occurred in the USA); 4 cases were excluded because test results for _B. pseudomallei_ were negative; 1 case whose clinical isolate was never submitted for confirmatory testing; and another case for which information on the index case or associated occupational exposures was not provided.

Of the 37 suspected melioidosis cases, all were confirmed by laboratory testing; 34 were human infections and 3 were animal infections. (Figure, Table 1 [for figures and tables, see original URL - Mod.LL]). 6 incidents of possible occupational exposure involving research activities were also reported (Figure, Table 2), but only 2 incidents involved occupational exposures (Table 3) and no infections occurred from those incidents. BSPB received reports of suspected cases and exposures from 20 states and Puerto Rico. At least 1 form of technical expertise (epidemiology assistance or laboratory confirmation) was provided by BSPB to each of these jurisdictions involving human or animal cases. None of the human cases were considered to have acquired the disease as a result of occupational exposure or intentional release. Epidemiologic investigations indicated that 2 of 34 patients did not have any travel history outside of the USA (28,29). Although a 3rd patient had a history of international travel, the patient did not travel to any countries where melioidosis is known to be endemic (Table 4); however, the patient might have been exposed to _B. pseudomallei_ while working in a reptile wholesale warehouse located in the USA. 3 confirmed animal cases involving 1 iguana and 2 macaques were reported from 2 states (30,31).

Among the 261 persons identified by state health departments to be at risk for occupational exposure to _B. pseudomallei_ while performing laboratory diagnostics, 43 (16 per cent) had high-risk exposures, 130 (50 per cent) had low-risk exposures, and 88 (34 per cent) had exposures that were classified as undetermined or of unknown risk (Table 3).

Discussion
----------
The small number of melioidosis cases reported in the USA has been increasing slightly each year since 2008. This might reflect an increase in travel to locations endemic for melioidosis with patients developing disease after their return to the USA or could represent unidentified foci of locally acquired _B. pseudomallei_ infections in the USA.

Melioidosis occurs in tropical and subtropical areas (for example, Australia and South East Asia), with highest endemicity in north east Thailand, northern Australia, Singapore, and parts of Malaysia. South east China, Taiwan, the Philippines, and much of the Indian subcontinent also are considered endemic areas. Sporadic cases are found in south west Asia, Papua New Guinea, and several locations in Africa and the Pacific regions (32). Within the Americas, _B. pseudomallei_ has been isolated from environmental samples in Peru (33), Brazil (33,34), Haiti (33), and Puerto Rico (36). Human cases have been reported from the United States, Mexico, El Salvador, and the Caribbean (35). In the USA, reported cases have primarily occurred among persons immigrating or visiting from areas where the disease is endemic. For example, a previous report documented melioidosis in a person who had travel history to Honduras and in another person who was a resident of Honduras visiting the United States at the time of diagnosis (19). Although the majority of melioidosis cases in the USA have occurred among persons with documented travel history (Table 5), in 2 instances, the infected persons did not have any travel outside of the USA; infections occurred in 2008 and 2013 (28,29). The source of infection in a reported case in 2010 was unknown but was suspected to be from occupational exposure to imported reptiles. The patient did not report travel to any areas where melioidosis is endemic. However, the patient worked in a reptile importation and distribution center, which might have resulted in exposure to the bacterium (unpublished data, CDC, 2010). Melioidosis infections in 2 iguanas, including 1 within the reporting period for this manuscript, were recently reported in California (30).

The movement of pathogens from 1 geographic area to another is often influenced by the frequency of global human movement (37). Diseases not normally diagnosed in some geographic areas can easily be imported by tourists, immigrants, and workers (38). In 2012, the number of international tourist arrivals to the USA increased by about 6 per cent (39) from 62.8 million visitors in 2011 to 66.7 million visitors in 2012 (40). A 6 per cent increase in flight departures (from 5107 departures in 2011 to 5415 departures in 2012) was documented among USA residents traveling to Asia, which included melioidosis-endemic countries (for example, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines). Thailand, Singapore, and the Philippines were among the top destinations of USA residents traveling abroad (41).

Because of the slight increase in the number of cases since 2009, melioidosis might be considered an emerging infection in the USA, and standardized reporting could enable a better understanding of the incidence and prevalence of the disease in the USA. Physicians are encouraged to consider melioidosis in their differential diagnosis of acute febrile illnesses among persons with a history of international travel to areas where the disease is endemic or with specific risk factors for melioidosis (e.g., diabetes or immunodeficiency). Of note, 3 cases of melioidosis occurred in American residents with no travel history either outside of the USA or to regions where melioidosis is endemic, possibly indicating unrecognized sources of exposure in the USA. Therefore, being aware that this infection can be seen in persons without an obvious history of travel to locations where _B. pseudomallei_ is endemic is important.

_Burkholderia_ spp. are relatively easy to aerosolize when manipulated in the laboratory. Thus, working with these organisms put laboratory workers at risk for laboratory-acquired infections. Laboratory work involving known or suspected _Burkholderia_ spp. isolates requires use of a biosafety cabinet and appropriate PPE (5).

Conclusion
----------
Melioidosis is the only overlap select agent that is not a nationally notifiable disease, and reporting of cases to CDC is voluntary. Given the slight increase in the number of melioidosis cases reported since 2009, melioidosis might be considered an emerging disease in the United States, and standardized reporting could enable a better understanding of the incidence and prevalence of the disease in the USA.

Physicians and other health-care personnel should be aware of the increase of cases reported in the USA, especially given the identification of infected persons without travel histories to endemic areas or known risk factors. Laboratory and research personnel are encouraged to follow proper safety practices and use appropriate PPE when working with select agents such as _B. pseudomallei_ or unknown pathogens.

References [the entire reference list can be found at the original URL, the more clinical citations 1-3, 13-23, 28-29 are retained here - Mod.LL]
1. White NJ. Melioidosis. Lancet 2003;361: 1715-22.
2. CDC. Federal Select Agent Program. US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2014. Available at http://www.selectagents.gov/.
3. Currie BJ. Burkholderia pseudomallei and Burkholderia mallei: Melioidosis and glanders. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Raphael D, editors. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles and practice of infectious diseases. Seventh Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill; 2009:2869-2879.
13. McCormick JB, Sexton DJ, McMurray JG, et al. Human-to-human transmission of Pseudomonas pseudomallei. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:512-513.
14. McBride J, Currie BJ. Transmission of Burkholderia pseudomallei via breast milk in northern Australia. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004;23:1169-1171.
15. Abbink FC, Orendi JM, de Beaufort AJ. Mother-to-child transmission of Burkholderia pseudomallei. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1171-1172.
16. Harish BN, Bhat V, Parija SC, Noyal MJC. Neonatal melioidosis: a case report from India. Indian J Med Microbiol 2009;27:260-263.
17. Lumbiganon P, Pengsaa K, Puapermpoonsiri S, Puapairoj A. Neonatal melioidosis: a report of 5 cases. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1988;7:634-636.
18. CDC. Laboratory exposure to Burkholderia pseudomallei--Los Angeles, California, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;53:988-90.
19. CDC. Imported melioidosis--South Florida, 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2006;55:873-876.
20. Ngauy V, Lemeshev Y, Sadkowski L, Crawford G. Cutaneous melioidosis in a man who was taken as a prisoner of war by the Japanese during World War II. J Clin Microbiol 2005;43: 970-972.
21. Yee KC, Lee MK, Chua CT, Puthucheary SD. Melioidosis, the great mimicker: a report of 10 cases from Malaysia. J Trop Med Hyg 1988;91: 249-254.
22. Wiersinga WJ, Currie BJ, Peacock SJ Melioidosis. N Engl J Med 2012;367:1035-1044.
23. Gibney KB, Cheng AC, Currie BJ. Cutaneous melioidosis in the tropical top end of Australia: a prospective study and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 2008;47:603-609.
28. Stewart T, Engelthaler DM, Blaney DD, et al. Epidemiology and investigation of melioidosis, Southern Arizona. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17: 1286-1288.
29. Doker TJ, Quinn CL, Salehi ED, et al. Melioidosis Investigation Team. Fatal Burkholderia pseudomallei infection initially reported by Bacillus species, Ohio, 2013. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2014;91: 743-746.

[authors: Benoit TJ, Blaney DD, Gee JE, Elrod MG, Hoffmaster AR, Doker TJ, et al; Bacterial Special Pathogens Branch, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This is an excellent discussion of melioidosis in the USA. The totals line from Table 1, the number of melioidosis cases in humans and animals -- USA and Puerto Rico, 2008-2013 -- is shown below:

Year / Number of cases of melioidosis
2008 / 2
2009 / 2
2010 / 5
2011 / 7
2012 / 11
2013 / 10
Total / 37
- Mod.LL

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=3492439,106.]
See Also
Melioidosis - USA (06): contam. source, new human case 20150313.3229363
Melioidosis - USA (05): 2 new seropositive monkeys 20150307.3215130
Melioidosis - USA (04): update 20150302.3202447
Melioidosis - USA (03): comment 20150216.3168433
Melioidosis - USA (02): background 20150211.3159588
Melioidosis - USA: (LA) primate, human 20150210.3157436
2014
---
Melioidosis - Worldwide: western hemisphere cases 20140402.2370033
2006
---
Melioidosis 2005: USA (FL) ex Honduras 20060820.2334
.................................................ll/pg/sh
</body>
