<header id=018254>
Published Date: 2012-12-06 13:24:58 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mumps, 2011 - USA: (CA) university students
Archive Number: 20121206.1441071
</header>
<body id=018254>
MUMPS, 2011 - USA: (CALIFORNIA), UNIVERSITY STUDENTS
****************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 7 Dec 2012
Source: MMWR Weekly, Volume 61, No. 48 ;986-989 [abbreviated & edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6148a2.htm?s_cid=mm6148a2_e


Mumps is a vaccine-preventable viral disease characterized by swelling of the salivary glands; serious complications (e.g., meningitis, encephalitis, orchitis, or oophoritis) can occur. On 29 Sep 2011, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 3 cases of mumps among students recently evaluated at their university's student health services with symptoms suggestive of mumps. An investigation by CDPH, student health services, and the local health department identified 29 mumps cases. The presumed source patient was an unvaccinated student with a history of recent travel to Western Europe, where mumps is circulating. The student had mumps symptoms over 28 days before the onset of symptoms among the patients confirmed on 29 Sep 2011. Recognizing that at least 2 generations of transmission had occurred before public health authorities were alerted, measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine was provided as a control measure. This outbreak demonstrates the potential value of requiring MMR vaccination (including documentation of immunization or other evidence of immunity) before college enrollment, heightened clinical awareness, and timely reporting of suspected mumps patients to public health authorities [see also the ProMED-mail reports listed below. - Mod.CP].

On 25 Aug 2011, the presumed source patient, an unvaccinated male aged 21 years, arrived at the university's student health services with fever and unilateral facial and jaw swelling. The initial diagnosis was cellulitis, and antibiotics were prescribed. By day 6 after symptom onset, the patient complained of testicular pain, and mumps was suspected. He had not been vaccinated against mumps and had traveled to Western Europe during the exposure period. He was referred for mumps serological testing, but did not follow through. His illness was not reported to the local health department when mumps was suspected. Approximately 3 weeks later, a 2nd student, the source patient's roommate, was treated at student health services for fatigue and unilateral pain and swelling of the jaw and neck. This patient, a male aged 21 years with a history of receiving 2 doses of MMR vaccine, received a diagnosis of parotitis. Mumps serologies were drawn, and he was advised to isolate himself in his room for 5 days. Mumps immunoglobulin M (IgM) testing was negative, and immunoglobulin G testing was positive, a pattern that does not rule out acute mumps because the ability to detect IgM is poor in vaccine recipients. The local health department was not notified. When 3 subsequent cases of mumps were confirmed by PCR on 29 Sep 2011 at CDPH, an investigation was initiated.

During the outbreak period (25 Aug 2011-7 Jan 2012), investigators identified 29 cases that met the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists 2010 case definition of mumps.* The outbreak period extended from the symptom onset date of the source patient through 2 incubation periods after the symptom onset of the last laboratory-confirmed case. The average incubation period for mumps is 16-18 days (range: 12-25 days); thus, the timing of the 1st 5 patients indicated that at least 2 generations of transmission had occurred by the time public health was notified. Case-finding activities included notifying health-care providers serving the affected community, requesting PCR testing for persons with clinically compatible symptoms, and alerting adjacent local health departments to notify CDPH of suspected mumps cases.

All patients had epidemiologic links to the university: 27 (93 percent) were students; one was a close contact of a student, and one was a public health staff member who assisted during a mumps vaccination clinic. Among the 29 cases, 13 (45 percent) were laboratory confirmed by PCR; one was confirmed by the presence of mumps IgM, and the remainder were confirmed on the basis of symptoms clinically compatible with mumps together with epidemiologic links to the university. Of the epidemiologically linked cases, 11 were negative and 4 were not tested by PCR. All viral specimens were genotype G, the predominant mumps genotype circulating in Western Europe. Eight patients (28 percent), including the source patient, were students who participated in organized sports. Four of the 1st 5 patients resided in congregate housing, and 17 (59 percent) illnesses occurred among students living in congregate housing. Among the 29 cases, 22 (76 percent) mumps illnesses occurred among persons previously vaccinated with the recommended 2 doses of MMR vaccine.

CDC recommendations for mumps outbreak control include defining the at-risk population and transmission setting, and rapidly identifying and vaccinating persons without presumptive evidence of immunity (1). Other recommended control measures include cough etiquette, respiratory and hand hygiene, and isolation of infectious patients for 5 days. Early in the outbreak, the university arranged alternate housing to isolate infectious patients who resided in congregate housing; however, as the number of patients increased, this became less feasible. Students were encouraged to monitor themselves for mumps symptoms, and symptomatic students were encouraged to go to student health services for testing.

Of approximately 36 000 students enrolled at the university; an estimated 9300 reside in housing owned by, operated by, or affiliated with the university. Recognizing that at least 2 generations of transmission had occurred before public health authorities were alerted to this outbreak, and wanting to avert a larger outbreak, the local health department and the university, in consultation with CDPH and CDC, decided to provide MMR vaccine as a control measure. The university recommends that matriculating students receive 2 doses of MMR vaccine but does not require proof of MMR vaccination before matriculation, making student vaccination status difficult to assess. Therefore, messages sent to the university community advised that an additional dose of MMR vaccine, irrespective of previous MMR vaccination status, was recommended for all university community members, with an emphasis on those residing in congregate housing. Beginning one week after the local health department was alerted, 5 vaccination clinics were held during a 4-week period; a total of 3631 persons received a dose of MMR vaccine.

MMWR Editorial Note:

This outbreak demonstrates that even persons who have received 2 doses of mumps vaccine might not be protected against mumps and highlights the importance of heightened clinical awareness and timely reporting of suspected mumps cases to public health authorities (2). The effectiveness of MMR vaccine to prevent mumps has been estimated at medians of 78 percent (range: 49-91 percent) for one dose and 88 percent (range: 66-95 percent) for 2 doses (3). Despite a substantial decline in U.S. mumps cases since mumps vaccine licensure in 1967, large mumps outbreaks have occurred in recent years among vaccinated populations. The World Health Organization indicates that only 62 percent of countries use mumps vaccine in national programs. Although MMR vaccine is included in national programs in Europe, MMR vaccination rates declined in many European countries over the last decade because of vaccine safety concerns, and outbreaks of measles and mumps have occurred. Public colleges and universities in 22 states and the District of Columbia require that enrolling students provide documentation that they have received 2 doses of MMR vaccine.

Although mumps outbreaks have occurred in populations in which many persons have received 2 doses of MMR vaccine, prematriculation MMR vaccination might prevent the introduction of mumps and limit its spread if it is introduced into a university setting. In this outbreak, the suspected source patient was unvaccinated, and the outbreak might have been prevented if a prematriculation requirement had been in place. Documentation of MMR vaccination also can allow public health officials to rapidly assess the mumps vaccination status of exposed students and prioritize vaccination efforts.

Recognition and prompt reporting of clinically suspected mumps, even in the absence of laboratory confirmation, facilitates early implementation of control measures and can mitigate outbreaks. Reliable identification of mumps infections can be difficult; PCR testing is preferred when testing previously vaccinated persons. Control measures for mumps are limited. Neither MMR vaccine nor immune globulin is effective as postexposure prophylaxis; however, in an outbreak setting, MMR vaccine might reduce transmission to susceptible persons not yet exposed to the mumps virus.

Even though a population might be highly vaccinated, some persons who have received 2 doses of MMR vaccine still will be susceptible. Data collected during previous mumps outbreaks on college campuses indicate that extended person-to-person contact, in combination with waning vaccine-induced immunity, might make colleges and universities high-risk settings for outbreaks, even when 2-dose MMR vaccination coverage is high. In addition, patients are infectious before onset of parotitis, and asymptomatic persons can transmit disease. Isolation of patients for 5 days after parotitis onset and monitoring of contacts for symptoms are primary control measures. However, even strict isolation of reported patients is unlikely to completely interrupt disease transmission. CDC has evaluated use of a 3rd dose of MMR vaccine for mumps outbreak control during 2 previous mumps outbreaks in which transmission was sustained despite high 2-dose coverage. During both outbreaks, targeted vaccination was followed by a decrease in mumps incidence among the target group. Available data are insufficient to recommend for or against the use of a 3rd dose of MMR vaccine for mumps outbreak control. Because control measures for mumps are limited, the ability to offer a 3rd dose of MMR vaccine might be a tool that could be used in an attempt to limit the extent of mumps outbreaks, particularly in high-risk settings.

Colleges and universities should consider implementing prematriculation immunization requirements similar to those recommended by the American College Health Association, including ensuring that students have documented receipt of 2 doses of MMR vaccine. Public health officials should be aware of disclosure limitations under FERPA and how these might impact communicable disease reporting requirements and timely investigation of outbreaks. Clinicians should be diligent about reporting suspected cases of mumps to local health departments, and PCR testing should be performed for vaccinated persons with suspected mumps. More data are needed regarding the effectiveness of the use of a 3rd dose of MMR vaccine to control outbreaks.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This mumps outbreak occurred at a university that did not require proof of MMR vaccination of students before enrollment. The presumed source patient was an unvaccinated student who had recently returned from Western Europe, where mumps was circulating. Among the 29 cases, 22 (76 percent) mumps illnesses occurred among persons previously vaccinated with the recommended 2 doses of MMR vaccine. This outbreak demonstrates that even persons who have received 2 doses of mumps vaccine might not be protected against mumps and highlights the importance of heightened clinical awareness and timely reporting of suspected mumps cases to public health authorities.

Reliable identification of mumps infections can be difficult; PCR testing is preferred when testing previously vaccinated persons. Control measures for mumps are limited. Neither MMR vaccine nor immune globulin is effective as postexposure prophylaxis; however, in an outbreak setting, MMR vaccine might reduce transmission to susceptible persons not yet exposed to the mumps virus.

Colleges and universities should consider implementing prematriculation immunization requirements similar to those recommended by the American College Health Association, including ensuring that students have documented receipt of 2 doses of MMR vaccine.

Interested readers should consult the original text via the source URL to view the figure, tabulated data and references. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1hcv.]
See Also
2011
----
Mumps - USA (04): (CA) university students 20111011.3045
Mumps - USA (03): (CA) university students 20111007.3014
Mumps - USA (02): (CA) university students, alert 20111006.3008
Mumps - USA: (IL) university students 20110928.2936
.................................................cp/msp/mpp
</body>
