<header id=064254>
Published Date: 2022-05-27 09:59:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Monkeypox update (05)
Archive Number: 20220527.8703493
</header>
<body id=064254>
MONKEYPOX UPDATE (05)
*********************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] USA
[2] Canada (Quebec)
[3] UK (national, Wales, Northern Ireland)
[4] Spain and Portugal
[5] Immunity after vaccination
[6] WHO advice for gay, bisexual, and men who have sex with men
[7] Virus mutations and transmission

******
[1] USA
Date: Thu 26 May 2022 9:02 PM CEST
Source: NBC News [edited]
https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/us-monkeypox-cases-identified-rcna30388


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has identified 9 cases of monkeypox across 7 US states, officials said Thursday [26 May 2022]: California, Florida, Massachusetts, New York, Utah, Virginia, and Washington.

"The US has the resources we need to help us respond to monkeypox in this country right now. We've been preparing for this type of outbreak for decades," CDC Director Dr Rochelle Walensky said in a briefing.

Walensky mentioned 2 vaccines that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration for smallpox and stored in the National Strategic Stockpile. The US has 100 million doses of one vaccine, called ACAM2000. The 2nd, called Jynneos, is FDA-approved for use against monkeypox in particular, and some doses of it have already been distributed.

Although some of the US patients have a history of travel to areas where monkeypox has been spreading recently, that's not true for everyone. Given that, Walensky said, "we need to presume that there is some community spread."

Nearly all of the cases are so far all among men who have sex with men, though Walensky emphasized that "the risk of exposure is not limited to any one particular group."

"Other communities outside of the LGBTQ community also need to remain vigilant. The transmission can happen whether you are in that community or not in that community," said Dr Raj Panjabi, senior director for global health security and biodefense at the White House National Security Council.

What we know about the US monkeypox cases so far
------------------------------------------------
The CDC did not clarify in the Thursday briefing [26 May 2022] whether all 9 cases have been confirmed.

Massachusetts last week confirmed the 1st US case in the current outbreak: a man who recently traveled to Canada. He was hospitalized on [12 May 2022] and remains in good condition, the state's health department said. The CDC described the man's lesions as firm, deep-seated, bumpy, and well-defined, which is characteristic of monkeypox. Patients often develop a rash that progresses to small bumps on the skin, followed by blisters that may fill with whitish fluid.

The 2nd patient arrived at New York City's Bellevue Hospital on 19 May [2022] and tested positive for orthopoxvirus, according to the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. In a statement on Thursday [26 May 2022], the department said that although "CDC tests did not conclusively identify the monkeypox virus," the patient was "presumptively diagnosed with monkeypox."

The 2 cases identified in Salt Lake County, Utah, are adults living in the same household. They began experiencing symptoms after traveling internationally to an area with monkeypox cases earlier this month [May 2022], the Salt Lake County Health Department said. "Both cases have been confirmed by the CDC as monkeypox," the department said on Wednesday [25 May 2022]. The patients' illnesses are mild and they are expected to fully recover.

Florida's 2 monkeypox cases are both in Broward County. At least one is related to international travel, CDC officials said on Monday [23 May 2022]. Both patients are isolated.

Health officials in King County, Washington, meanwhile, are monitoring a case in a man who traveled to a country with monkeypox cases in the last month. He is recovering at home, officials said, after testing positive for orthopoxvirus on Monday [23 May 2022].

California's case is in Sacramento County and has been confirmed by the CDC. The patient was identified on Saturday [21 May 2022] then tested positive for _Orthopoxvirus_ on Monday [23 May 2022] and is isolating at home. "This case appears to be related to recent travel to Europe," Dr Olivia Kasirye, Sacramento's Public Health Officer, said in a statement. She added that the "risk to the general public is extremely low."

CDC officials added Virginia to the list of states with monkeypox cases on Thursday [26 May 2022]. The state's health department said in a press release that the patient is female and had a "recent international travel history to an African country where the disease is known to occur."

How monkeypox cases are tested and confirmed
------------------------------------------------
Laboratories use orthopoxvirus tests to identify monkeypox cases. Orthopoxvirus is a category of viruses that includes smallpox and monkeypox, but smallpox can be ruled out because it has been eradicated.

That's how the Massachusetts case was found, the CDC explained. The agency said the patient got the West African strain of monkeypox, which tends to cause mild disease. Around 1 percent of people who've contracted that strain have died in the past, according to the World Health Organization.

Massachusetts health officials are investigating more than 200 of the man's contacts, most of whom are health care workers, the CDC said Monday [23 May 2022].

A senior administration official at the White House said Tuesday [24 May 2022] that some doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital were exposed to the man before they knew he had monkeypox. The doctors weren't wearing the right protective gear, so they are being offered a vaccine, which could keep them from contracting the disease or developing symptoms if administered shortly after exposure.

Experts are optimistic about containing the outbreak
----------------------------------------------------
The US monkeypox case tally is relatively small compared to some countries in Europe. Spain has confirmed 84 cases and the UK 85. In total, nearly 300 cases have been confirmed outside of Africa since the start of the month [May 2022].

People can get monkeypox from exposure to others' rashes and lesions, which often appear after a patient has developed flu-like symptoms. Several recent patients have reported rashes in the genital area that did not spread to the rest of the body. That could make the infections less visible, World Health Organization officials said Monday [23 May 2022].

Experts remain optimistic that the outbreak can be contained through contact tracing and targeted vaccinations.

"We're working hard to contain the cases that are happening so they don't spread onward," Jennifer McQuiston, deputy director of the CDC's High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology division, said Thursday [26 May 2022].

"We continue to watch what is happening and think about whether wider vaccination recommendations would make sense, but at this time only have 9 known cases," McQuiston added. "We have contacts that we've identified associated with those cases that would likely most benefit from the vaccine, and so that's where we're focusing our energies right now."

The FDA approved the Jynneos vaccine in 2019. Though it's the only one approved for monkeypox, older smallpox vaccines have been shown to protect against monkeypox around 85 percent of the time.

"As long as the public health people jump on this and get out there and track down everyone these people have been in contact with, I think you can stop this pretty quickly," said David Evans, a virologist at the University of Alberta.

[Byline: Aria Bendix]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED
and
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[A 24 May 2022 report stated that "the United States is responding to a request for the release of monkeypox vaccine from the nation's Strategic National Stockpile as a global outbreak of cases is under investigation."

"I can report that there has been a request for release of the Jynneos vaccine from the National Stockpile for some of the high-risk contacts of some of the early patients, so that is actively happening right now," Dr. Jennifer McQuiston, deputy director of the Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology within the CDC's National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, said Monday [23 May 2022]. McQuiston said the United States has a "good stock" of vaccine because it has been preparing for the possibility of needing to use doses for smallpox."
(https://www.dailynews.com/2022/05/24/us-in-process-of-releasing-monkeypox-vaccine-from-national-stockpile-for-high-risk-people-cdc-says/).
- Mod.TY

[ProMED map of the United States: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703493,106]

******
[2] Canada (Quebec)
Date: Thu 26 May 2022 5:47 PM EDT
Source: Global News [edited]
https://globalnews.ca/news/8871264/quebec-monkeypox-25-confirmed-cases/


Quebec public health officials are reporting a total of 25 confirmed cases of monkeypox in the province as of Thursday [26 May 2022].

Dr Luc Boileau, interim public health director in the province, described it as a "serious outbreak" of the virus. Officials are investigating several more suspected cases.

"We had about 20 to 30 suspected cases under investigation so far," Boileau said.

The province will also begin administering the Imvamune vaccine to close contacts of confirmed or suspected cases of monkeypox as soon as Friday [27 May 2022]. Boileau said the federal government has provided the supplies, which arrived earlier this week.

A single dose of the vaccine will be provided within 4 days of exposure to the virus. Quebec's Health Ministry said in a statement that a 2nd dose could be administered, but only if the risk of exposure is "still present 28 days later" and "only following a decision by public health authorities."

Boileau said the majority of confirmed cases in the province are tied mostly to men who have had sexual relations with other men. There has been one case in a person under 18.

Health Minister Christian Dubé said Thursday [26 May 2022] that authorities are paying close attention to the greater Montreal area, which he described as the "epicentre" of the monkeypox outbreak.

"This is an important issue, but this is really centralized. This is really at a specific point," he told reporters in Quebec City. "And Montreal (public) health will follow that very closely."

Last week, Quebec recorded the 1st cases of the virus in the country. The 1st suspected cases were reported on 12 May [2022] in Montreal.

Monkeypox is a rare disease that comes from the same family of viruses that causes smallpox, which the World Health Organization declared eradicated around the globe in 1980.

The virus spreads through prolonged closed contact. It can cause fever, headache, muscle aches, exhaustion, swollen lymph nodes and lesions.

[Byline: Kalina Laframboise]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[ProMED map of Quebec Province, Canada: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703493,26]

******
[3] UK (national, Wales, Northern Ireland)
Date: Thu 26 May 2022 19:04 BST
Source: Daily Mail [abridged, edited]
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-10856433/Now-monkeypox-hits-Wales-Nation-logs-case-UKs-outbreak-keeps-growing.html


Now monkeypox is in every corner of UK
Wales and Northern Ireland log 1st cases of tropical virus as outbreak keeps growing
- Northern Ireland's is set to hold a briefing later on Thursday [26 May 2022] confirming that the virus has spread to the nation.
- It comes after Public Health Wales confirmed the infection this morning [26 May 2022] although no details have been shared.
- Scotland has so far logged one monkeypox case, while no infections have been reported Northern Ireland.
- It brings UK total monkeypox cases to 80, of whom a 'notable proportion' are gay and bisexual men.
- 19 countries across the world have now detected the smallpox-like virus over the past 3 weeks

Monkeypox has now been detected in every UK nation, as Northern Ireland and Wales today confirmed their 1st cases of the tropical virus. It means 80 patients in Britain have been sickened with the illness in the past 3 weeks. MailOnline understands more cases will be confirmed this afternoon.

Health chiefs are alarmed about the ever-growing cluster of cases, given the smallpox-like infection is usually only spotted in Africa. A disproportionate number are among gay and bisexual men.

Officials are confident the monkeypox outbreak will not grow exponentially like COVID.

But 19 countries across the world, mainly in Europe, have already detected the virus since [6 May 2022]. Until now, cases outside of western and central Africa were confined to a handful of people with travel links to the continent.

Monkeypox patients will be told to keep their distance from family pets in official new guidance to be issued later this week, it was revealed today.

Experts have raised alarm that if the virus spreads to cats, dogs and other pets, monkeypox may become endemic among animals in Britain as it is in parts of Nigeria. [In Africa the virus is suspected to be endemic in wild rodents, not in domestic dogs, cats and other pets. - Mod.TY]

Northern Ireland's Department of Health is expected to hold a briefing later today [26 May 2022] confirming that the virus has spread to the nation. The patient is understood to be receiving hospital care.

Meanwhile, Public Health Wales confirmed an infection earlier today [26 May 2022].

Dr Giri Shankar, director of health protection for Public Health Wales, warned 'severe illness can occur in some individuals' but reassured people the risk to the general public is low.

Dr Shankar said: 'We are working with the UKHSA [UK Health Security Agency], Public Health Scotland, and Public Health Agency Northern Ireland, and we are ready to respond to cases of monkeypox in Wales.

'The case is being managed appropriately. To protect patient confidentiality, no further details relating to the patient will be disclosed.'

He added: 'We are reassuring people that monkeypox does not usually spread easily between people, and the overall risk to the general public is low.

'It is usually a mild self-limiting illness, and most people recover within a few weeks. However, severe illness can occur in some individuals.'

The announcements take the cumulative number of cases in Britain to 80, after 7 more were recorded in England yesterday [25 May 2022].
Scotland has so far detected one case.

UKHSA's chief medical adviser Dr Susan Hopkins yesterday said new monkeypox cases were being spotted 'promptly' due to extensive surveillance and contact tracing efforts.

Officials are advising high-risk individuals who may have been in contact with an infected patient to isolate for 21 days -- which is how long it can take for symptoms to appear.

A vaccine shown to be up to 85 per cent effective at preventing monkeypox is also being offered to close contacts, including the NHS workers who treated them However, there are concerns among some scientists that Britain may not have enough vaccine doses to continue the strategy if the outbreak continues to grow. The UK has 20 000 shots at its disposal, enough to vaccinate 10 000 people given that it is a two-dose vaccine. But there are already calls for the vaccine programme to be widened to all gay and bisexual men, which if approved could see thousands jabbed.

Monkeypox, which was first discovered in lab monkeys in the late 1950s, is usually mild but can kill up to 10 per cent of people it infects. The milder strain causing the current outbreak kills one in 100 -- similar to when COVID first hit.

Symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches, backache, swollen lymph nodes, chills, and exhaustion. But its most synonymous symptom is an unusual rash that often begins on the face and spreads to the genitals or limbs. The rash can look like chickenpox or syphilis, and scabs can form which then fall off.

European health officials earlier this week expressed concerns that animals could become permanent reservoirs of monkeypox if it is allowed to make the jump to pets. This would increase the odds of it becoming endemic in Europe.

Now the UK's Defra [Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs] is drawing up guidelines in an attempt to limit the risk of monkeypox patients infecting the likes of cats, dogs and rabbits There are also fears infected patients could contaminate their pet's fur and the illness be passed on to others in their household.

It comes after experts yesterday warned that the ceasing of routine smallpox vaccine has left the world more vulnerable to monkeypox outbreaks. The UK's smallpox vaccination campaign came to an end in 1971, when the disease had been essentially eradicated. It means adults aged 51 in the UK now are the youngest cohort who could be vaccinated against smallpox and monkeypox.

As the proportion of the UK population with immunity against monkeypox has declined, it has theoretically given the virus room to circulate and be transmitted easier.

Dr Romulus Breban, a researcher at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, said the current global outbreak was 'waiting to happen' because of the world's 'almost zero' immunity level. He told the Guardian: 'Our immunity level is almost zero. People aged 50 and above are likely to be immune but the rest of us not, so we are very, very susceptible.'

Professor Neil Mabbott, an immunopathologist from the University of Edinburgh, told MailOnline over-50s are the only group protected against monkeypox. 'Although the level of immunity will wane in time, smallpox vaccination provides long-lasting protection,' he said. 'Some estimates suggest this may last for decades.'

He said: 'The monkeypox virus is closely related to smallpox. So smallpox vaccines are very effective against monkeypox. Here too, there is some evidence that smallpox vaccines used decades ago are still effective against monkeypox.

However, not all experts agree that a drop in immunity is fuelling the monkeypox spread. Professor Paul Hunter, an infectious disease expert based at the University of East Anglia, said it was 'difficult to say'. He pointed to data showing the smallpox vaccine was only fully effective for 'about five years'. He told MailOnline: 'I think it would be a push to assume [it gives] significant protection 50 years later. There may still be some modifying effect but I don't know.'

How is the UK managing the outbreak?
------------------------------------
MailOnline this week revealed close contacts of monkeypox cases, including NHS workers, are already being offered the Imvanex smallpox vaccine.

The strategy, known as ring vaccination, involves jabbing and monitoring anyone around an infected person to form a buffer of immune people to limit the spread of a disease.

A spokesman for the UKHSA did not disclose how many have been vaccinated, but said: 'Those who have required the vaccine have been offered it.'

Health chiefs are also contacting all close contacts of those who have been infected.

Additionally, close contacts of those with a confirmed monkeypox infection are being told to stay at home for 21 days and avoid contact under-12s, immunosuppressed people, and pregnant women.

The Government said unprotected direct contact or high risk environmental contact includes living in the same house as someone with monkeypox, having sexual contact with them or even just changing their bedding 'without appropriate PPE'.

As with COVID, someone who has come within one metre [3 ft.] of an infected person is classed as a monkeypox contact.

This lower category of contact, which also includes sitting next to a person with monkeypox on a plane, means a tracer will call the person every day for 3 weeks and they will be advised to stay off work for 21 days if their job involves children or immuno-suppressed colleagues.

The UK has stopped short of requiring people by law to quarantine if they develop monkeypox, but ministers are considering a public health campaign to alert gay and bisexual men, because of the number of cases in this group.

What if it continues to spread?
-------------------------------
Experts told MailOnline they 'could see a role' for a targeted jab rollout to gay men in the UK 'if this isn't brought under control quickly'.

Close contacts of the UK's known cases are already being offered the jab, which was originally designed for smallpox. The 2 rash-causing viruses are very similar.

A health source told MailOnline 'there would be a number of strategies we'd look at' if cases continued to rise.

Professor Kevin Fenton, London's public health regional director, said if the outbreak in the capital continues to grow then the rollout of vaccines and treatments could be broadened to more groups.

He said there are 'plans in place' to have more antivirals if the outbreak keeps growing.

Is there a vaccine for it?
--------------------------
The smallpox vaccine, called Imvanex in the UK and Jynneos in the US, can protect against monkeypox because the viruses behind the illnesses are closely related.

Data shows it prevents around 85 per cent of cases, and has been used 'off-label' in the UK since 2018.

The jab, thought to cost GBP 20 [USD 25] per dose, contains a modified vaccinia virus, which is similar to both smallpox and monkeypox, but does not cause disease in people.

Because of its similarity to the pox viruses, antibodies produced against this virus offer cross protection.

Are there any drugs to treat it?
--------------------------------
There are a handful of antivirals and therapies for smallpox that appear to work on monkeypox.

This includes the drug tecovirimat, which was approved for monkeypox in the EU in January [2022]. Tecovirimat prevents the virus from leaving an infected cell, hindering the spread of the virus within the body.

An injectable antiviral used to treat AIDS called cidofovir can be used to manage the infection, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It also works by stopping the growth of the virus.

What is the situation with the UK outbreak?
-------------------------------------------
There are 20 cases confirmed in the UK between [6-20 May 2022].

No details about the 11 confirmed on [20 May 2022] have been released yet. But 6 of the previous 9 confirmed cases were in men who have sex with men -- which officials say is 'highly suggestive of spread in sexual networks'.

How worrying is it?
-------------------
UK health chiefs say the risk of a major outbreak is low. But experts not that the outbreak is 'concerning' and that it is 'very unusual' to see community transmission in Europe.

Dr Michael Head, a global health expert at the University of Southampton, said the rise in cases is 'undoubtedly worrying'. But he noted that 'a big monkeypox outbreak like this is still a very different situation to a COVID pandemic'.

Dr Head added: 'Given 11 further cases have been announced today [26 May 2022], it's likely there will be more cases to come in the UK.

'There certainly will be further cases confirmed in other countries. The contact tracing efforts by public health teams will be crucial in containing the outbreak.'

Dr Charlotte Hammer, an infectious diseases expert at the University of Cambridge, said: 'It is very unusual to see community transmission in Europe, previous monkeypox cases have been in returning travellers with limited ongoing spread.

'Based on the number of cases that were already discovered across Europe and the UK in the previous days, it is not unexpected that additional cases are now being and will be found, especially with the contact tracing that is now happening.'

[Byline: Joe Davies]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[In a 23 May 2022 report, Dr Carlos Maluquer de Motes, Reader in Molecular Virology, University of Surrey, said, "The increase in the number of cases is to be expected, because we are now actively looking for patients that have symptoms compatible with monkeypox virus infection. The chains of transmission behind these remain unclear, but most seem unconnected to outbound travellers from endemic countries, so are not imported cases. This scenario indicates that community transmission has been occurring for a period of time inadvertently. It is therefore likely that more cases will appear over the next days and even weeks." (https://www.sciencemediacentre.org/expert-reaction-to-latest-number-of-monkeypox-cases-identified-in-the-uk-the-current-situation-and-advice-as-published-by-ukhsa/).
- Mod.TY

[ProMED map of the United Kingdom: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703493,40]

******
[4] Spain and Portugal
Date: Wed 25 May 2022
Source: Channel News Asia (CNA) [edited]
https://www.channelnewsasia.com/world/spains-monkeypox-tally-rises-48-11-new-cases-2705021


Health authorities in Spain's Madrid region said they detected 11 confirmed new cases of monkeypox on Tuesday [24 May 2022], bringing the total cases in Spain to 48, practically all in the capital city.

In neighboring Portugal, which along with Spain has been one of the main hotspots of the recent outbreak of the viral disease outside its endemic areas in Africa, health authorities added 2 confirmed cases, putting the total at 39.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED from HealthMap Alerts

[A 21 May 2022 report indicated that "the Paraiso sauna, a gay-friendly establishment whose name means "paradise" in the heart of Madrid, said on Twitter it was shutting its doors. 'The Paraiso sauna will remain closed for the next few days, a precautionary measure in the face of the alert... over the emergence of so-called monkey pox infections in the Madrid region,' it said. Enrique Ruiz Escudero, a health official for the Madrid region, told reporters the authorities had recorded 21 confirmed cases and 19 suspected cases. 'Most people who tested positive have a link to this source,' he said, referring to the sauna."
(https://www.thelocal.es/20220521/spanish-monkeypox-outbreak-linked-to-sauna/).
- Mod.TY

[ProMED maps:
Spain: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703493,43
Portugal: https://promedmail.org/promed-post?place=8703493,42]

******
[5] Immunity after vaccination
Date: Thu 26 May 2022 11:04 PM
Source: Yahoo Life [abridged, edited]
https://www.yahoo.com/lifestyle/dr-fauci-just-gave-concerning-210412961.html


Monkeypox is a disease that is caused by infection with the monkeypox virus, according to the CDC. The virus belongs to the _Orthopoxvirus_ genus, with also includes the virus that causes smallpox. As a result, some people might already be protected from monkeypox disease thanks to previous smallpox vaccinations. According to The New York Times, routine immunization for smallpox stopped in 1972 for most people in the US, although the military continued to be vaccinated against the virus until 1991.

"Because monkeypox virus is closely related to the virus that causes smallpox, the smallpox vaccine can protect people from getting monkeypox," the CDC explains.

But Dr Fauci has just given a concerning warning about people's protection. Even if you've had a previous smallpox vaccine, that may not be protecting you from monkeypox. Anthony Fauci, MD, the White House's top COVID adviser, told The New York Times on [26 May 2022] that people began questioning the smallpox vaccine's durability in 2001, following an anthrax attack. According to Fauci, it is reasonable to assume most vaccinated people are still protected, "but durability of protection varies from person to person. "We can't guarantee that a person who was vaccinated against smallpox is still going to be protected against monkeypox," Fauci told The New York Times.

According to the CDC, smallpox vaccines are believed to be effective at protecting people against monkeypox when given before exposure to virus, but also after exposure to potentially help prevent the disease or make it less severe. "Persons exposed to monkeypox virus and who have not received the smallpox vaccine within the last 3 years, should consider getting vaccinated," the CDC says on its website. "The sooner the person receives the vaccine, the more effective it will be in protecting against monkeypox virus."

Currently, the agency recommends boosters of smallpox vaccines every few years, but only "for persons at risk of occupation exposure," David Daigle, a spokesman for the CDC, said in a statement to The New York Times.

"Until we know more, we will be using available vaccine stocks for people who've had close contact with known cases, and people at highest risk for exposure through their jobs, like health care workers treating monkeypox patients," Daigle said.

[Byline: Kali Coleman]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[In the New York Times report cited above (https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/26/health/monkeypox-vaccine-immunity.html)," Dr Ferrucci and his colleagues at the NIH [National Institutes of Health], as well as other teams, have also found that antibody levels persist for decades after vaccination. Some studies have found that other branches of the immune system also wane slowly, but antibodies produced from smallpox vaccination may be enough on their own to protect against monkeypox."

"Laboratory evidence of antibodies does not prove that smallpox vaccination can protect against monkeypox. But answering that question would require that study participants be deliberately infected with smallpox or a related virus, an obviously unethical experiment."

"In 2003, dozens of Americans became infected with monkeypox after being exposed to infected prairie dogs. Of the 8 people who had previously been vaccinated, 5 developed an average of 3 pus-filled blisters, compared with an average of 33 in those who were unvaccinated. The other 3 vaccinated individuals had no symptoms at all. "They didn't even know they had been infected."

"Another study of that outbreak found that in a family of 3, the previously vaccinated father developed just 2 monkeypox lesions compared with 200 in the unvaccinated mother. Their unvaccinated 6-year-old daughter had about 90 lesions and was in a coma for 12 days (https://academic.oup.com/jid/article/190/10/1833/2191730?login=false)."

It will be interesting to learn as this outbreak continues if cases do not occur in individuals 50 years of age and older who have received smallpox vaccinations in the past. - Mod.TY]

******
[6] WHO: advice for gay, bisexual, and men who have sex with men
Date: Wed 25 May 2022
Source: WHO News [edited]
https://www.who.int/news/item/25-05-2022-monkeypox--public-health-advice-for-gay--bisexual-and-other-men-who-have-sex-with-men


An outbreak of a disease called monkeypox is currently taking place in many countries that do not typically have cases. This can be concerning, especially for people whose loved ones or community have been affected. Some cases have been identified through sexual health clinics in communities of gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men. It is important to note that the risk of monkeypox is not limited to men who have sex with men. Anyone who has close contact with someone who is infectious is at risk. However, given that the virus is being identified in these communities, learning about monkeypox will help ensure that as few people as possible are affected and that the outbreak can be stopped.

This public health advice (https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/hq-hiv-hepatitis-and-stis-library/public-health-advice-for-msm-on-monkeypox-22-may-2022.pdf) contains information on how monkeypox spreads, what to do if you think you have symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. It can be used by community leaders, influencers, health workers and people attending social events and parties to inform and engage communities of men who have sex with men.

What you need to know
---------------------
An outbreak of a disease called monkeypox is happening in some countries where the virus is not typically found. Some of these cases are being found in communities of gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men. Transgender people and gender-diverse people may also be more vulnerable in the context of the current outbreak.

Symptoms include:
- Rash with blisters on face, hands, feet, eyes, mouth and/or genitals
- Fever
- Swollen lymph nodes
- Headaches
- Muscle aches
- Low energy

You can catch monkeypox if you have close physical contact with someone who is showing symptoms. This includes touching and being face-to-face.

Monkeypox can spread during close skin-to-skin contact during sex, including kissing, touching, oral, and penetrative sex with someone who has symptoms. Avoid having close contact with anyone who has symptoms.

Protect yourself and others by:
- Isolating at home and talking to a health worker if you have symptoms.
- Avoid skin-to-skin or face-to-face contact, including sexual contact with anyone who has symptoms.
- Clean hands, objects, and surfaces that have been touched regularly.
- Wear a mask if you are in close contact with someone with symptoms.

Stigmatising people because of a disease is never ok. Anyone can get or pass on monkeypox, regardless of their sexuality.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

******
[7] Virus mutations and transmission
Date: Thu 26 May 2022 10:12 AM BST
Source: i News [edited]
https://inews.co.uk/news/health/monkeypox-virus-could-have-mutated-to-become-more-transmissible-between-humans-1651452


Scientists investigating the monkeypox outbreak are keeping an open mind about whether the virus has mutated to transmit more easily among humans, it has emerged.

The possibility that the cluster of cases in the UK, Europe and other regions where it is not endemic was triggered by "superspreader" events in Belgium and the Canary Islands is still a strong line of enquiry.

But sequencing of the monkeypox virus genome from this 2022 outbreak has shown some mutations have occurred which could be associated with human-to-human transmission.

Experts emphasised that it is too early to say whether the mutations have made the virus more transmissible, but it is being investigated as a possible factor.

The virus associated with this outbreak is not being classed as a new variant but rather a sublineage of the existing variant [clade] that is endemic in West Africa.

Scientists at the Genomics and Bioinformatics Unit of the National Institute of Health Doutor Ricardo Jorge in Lisbon, Portugal identified mutations in genomic sequences from 9 patients infected in the current monkeypox outbreak.

In a discussion on the forum virological.org [https://virological.org/], they detail "the 1st signs of microevolution within the outbreak cluster" including 7 genetic mutations.

There are also signs of gene deletion in the genomes from this outbreak, which could potentially point to increased transmission, the Portuguese researchers said.

Aris Katzourakis, professor of evolution and genomics at Oxford University's department of zoology, told "i" it was too early to say whether the changes were leading to increased transmission. He said there were signs in the 2022 genomes of "hypermutation" caused by the host's antiviral defences. He added: "It seems that it is possible that in this case, this set of mutations has enabled an 'evolutionary leap' in these monkeypox sequences, causing them to diverge more than would be expected.

"We don't know the functional consequences of this, but this certainly merits investigation in the light of potential for adaptation to human-to-human transmission.

"It is known that large DNA viruses like the poxviruses can evolve relatively rapidly by gene deletion, compared to the relative to the quite slow process of sequence change. "It's not unreasonable to imagine that this deletion could be involved in human-to-human transmission, however not all of the monkeypox genomes sequenced to date appear to bear it.

"The bottom line is there are several lines of enquiry for exploring whether these monkeypox genomes might be better adapted to human-to-human transmission. "However, it is too early to say whether this is a certainty, and to weigh this up against the potential transmission advantage of entering a well-connected transmission group."

Tom Wenseleers, a professor of evolutionary biology at the University of Leuven, Belgium, tweeted: "It remains an open question whether this new lineage could have different transmissibility. "If it would, it could provide a parsimonious answer to the question, 'Why do we see this international outbreak now?', but several factors likely contribute."

[Byline: Jane Merrick]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED

[It is very likely that virologists in those countries where monkeypox cases have occurred are sequencing the viruses involved and posting the sequences so that it will be possible to see if genomic changes occur in space and over time. - Mod.TY]
See Also
Monkeypox update (04) 20220526.8703477
Monkeypox update (03) 20220526.8703465
Monkeypox update (02) 20220524.8703425
Monkeypox update (01) 20220521.8703393
Monkeypox - North America: USA (MA) 20220519.8703351
Monkeypox - Europe: Portugal, Spain, UK 20220519.8703349
Monkeypox - UK (03): local transmission 20220518.8703317
Monkeypox - UK (02): ex Nigeria 20220515.8703269
Monkeypox - UK: (England) ex Nigeria 20220508.8703123
.................................................sb/ml/ty/mj/ml
</body>
